Review
doi:10.1038/nature21721
Flavour-changing neutral currents
making and breaking the standard model
F. Archilli1, M.-O. Bettler2, P. Owen3 & K. A. Petridis4
The standard model of particle physics is our best description yet of fundamental particles and their interactions, but it
is known to be incomplete. As yet undiscovered particles and interactions might exist. One of the most powerful ways to
search for new particles is by studying processes known as flavour-changing neutral current decays, whereby a quark
changes its flavour without altering its electric charge. One example of such a transition is the decay of a beauty quark
into a strange quark. Here we review some intriguing anomalies in these decays, which have revealed potential cracks
in the standard model—hinting at the existence of new phenomena.
T
he standard model of particle physics has been a spectacularly
successful theory for explaining the properties and interactions
of fundamental particles, with many measurements confirming
its predictions to extraordinary precision. However, cosmological obser-
vations of the apparent dark-matter content of the Universe, and of the
domi­nance of matter over antimatter, suggest that the standard model is
an incomplete theory. In addition, the standard model does not provide an
explanation for the observed patterns of masses of elementary particles.
Therefore, one of the current goals of experimental particle physics is to
discover new particles and interactions—commonly referred to as ‘new
physics’—that could provide an explanation for these observations.
Searches for such new particles are performed in two ways. The first
requires the production of a new particle directly from the collisions of
highly energetic beams of protons or electrons. The new particle sub-
sequently decays to a set of known standard model particles, whose
properties are measured in particle physics detectors. The ATLAS1 and
CMS2 collaborations at the Large Hadron Collider3 (LHC) at CERN are
examples of experiments that search directly for new particles produced
through the collisions of proton beams at unprecedented energies and
intensities.
The second method involves performing precise measurements of the
properties of known decays of hadrons (composites of quarks) that are
accurately described by the standard model. In this case, processes that
occur via the weak force—such as the decay of a kaon (a hadron containing
a strange quark) or of a b hadron (which contains a beauty quark)—
are particularly interesting. As a consequence of quantum-field theory,
such decays can occur through transient particles that have a physical
mass larger than the amount of mass-energy available from the decaying
particle. These transient particles are referred to as ‘virtual’. Heavy new
particles can cause large deviations from the standard model predictions
of the decay rate and of the dynamics of the decay products. Precise meas-
urements of such quantities are sensitive to particles beyond the standard
model that have masses far exceeding the available collision energy of the
LHC. The LHCb experiment4 operating at the LHC is an example of an
experiment that is searching for new physics through precision measure-
ments of the properties of known decays.
Decays involving the weak force
The weak force is mediated by the heavy W+, W− and Z0 bosons.
Transitions mediated by the W+ or W− boson are known as charged-
current processes, whereas those mediated by the Z0 boson are known as
neutral-current processes. There are six types (flavours) of quarks: down
(d), up (u), strange (s), charm (c), beauty (b) and top (t). These quarks
can change their flavour by interacting with the W+ or W− bosons, but
cannot by interacting with the Z0 boson.
Flavour-changing neutral currents (FCNCs)
By the end of the 1960s, the charged-current process that occurs when a
charged kaon decays into a muon and a neutrino (K+ →​  μ+νμ) had been
well established, but the neutral-current counterpart of this process,
K 0L →​  μ+μ−, had not been observed, posing a major puzzle in particle
physics. At the time, only three different flavours of quark were known to
exist, and while the existence of a fourth had been postulated5, there was
no experimental evidence for it. In 1970, Glashow, Iliopoulos and Maiani6
provided an explanation (the GIM mechanism) behind the suppression
of the neutral-current process relative to the charge-current process, by
proposing the existence of a fourth type of quark with specific couplings
to the known quarks. The contribution from this fourth quark would
cancel out the contribution from other quarks involved in the K 0L →​  μ+μ−
decay. In today’s language, the strange quark and the down quark that
make up the K 0L particle interact via a quantum-loop transition involving
predominantly a W boson and either an up quark or a charm quark, as
shown in Fig. 1a. Given the limitation that the quarks have the same mass,
the diagram involving the up quark exactly cancels that of the charm
quark, explaining the suppression of the K 0L →​  μ+μ− decay relative to the
K+ →​  μ+νμ decay.
The combination of experimental measurements and the proposed
GIM mechanism provided an indirect observation of the charm quark,
four years before it was observed directly7,8, with the discovery of the
J/ψ hadron (a bound state of a charm quark and an anticharm quark).
Such interplay between experimental measurements and theoretical pre-
dictions of quark flavours has shaped the standard model over the past
50 years.
FCNCs in decays of beauty quarks
Another example of a FCNC process involves the transition of a beauty
quark into a strange quark. This process can occur through the same
quantum-loop transition of the GIM mechanism, but is dominated by
the contribution from the top quark, as shown in Fig. 1b.
Owing to the large collision energy of the proton beams at the LHC,
hundreds of billions of b hadrons have been produced. As a result, the
LHCb collaboration’s measurements of FCNC decays of b hadrons are
1
National Institute for Subatomic Physics (Nikhef), Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 2European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), Geneva, Switzerland. 3Physik-Institut, Universität Zürich,
Zürich, Switzerland. 4HH Wills Physics Laboratory, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
8 J u n e 2 0 1 7 | VO L 5 4 6 | NAT U R E | 2 2 1
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.RESEARCH Review
a
b
s
K0L
d
P−
W
u, c
W
QP
P+
b
B0s
s
P−
W
t
W
QP
P+
Figure 1 | Examples of FCNC decays. Feynman diagrams depicting two
FCNC decays. a, The decay K 0L →​  μ+μ−. The strange quark (s) and the
down quark (d) that make up the K 0L particle interact via a quantum-loop
transition involving two virtual W bosons, either a virtual up quark (u) or
a virtual charm quark (c), and a muonic neutrino (νμ). The outcome is twoneutrinos, μ+ and μ−. b, The decay B0s →​  μ+μ−. The B0s particle is made up
of a beauty (b) and a strange (s) quark. This decay can occur through the
same quantum-loop transition as in a, but involves a virtual top quark (t)
instead.
often the most precise available, with important contributions also being
made by the CMS and ATLAS experiments. By contrast, a previous genera-
tion of experiments—BaBar9 and Belle10—collided beams of electrons and
positrons, producing fewer b hadrons (by a factor of approximately 1,000)
than the LHC. However, the clean environment of an electron–positron
collider did allow certain measurements to be made that are difficult in
the rather complicated proton–proton collision process at the LHC.
A particularly rare b-hadron FCNC decay involves the decay of a B0s
hadron (which comprises a beauty antiquark and a strange quark) into a
pair of muons, denoted B0s →​  μ+μ−. Using a combination of data from
the CMS and LHCb experiments11, this decay was for the first time
observed to a significance of more than five standard deviations placing
stringent constraints on new physics models, such as supersymmetry.
Another more common FCNC process involves the decay of a beauty
quark into a strange quark and two leptons (leptons are electrons, muons,
tauons and neutrinos). These decays are known as semileptonic, as their
decay products comprise part leptons and part hadrons. Measurements
of the properties of these decays are sensitive to new particles with masses
up to around 100 TeV (ref. 12). Recent measurements of semileptonic
FCNC decays have revealed discrepancies with standard model predic-
tions, which could indicate the existence of a new particle that is similar
to the Z0 boson of the standard model but up to 30 times heavier.
Alternatively, these discrepancies could also be explained through
unexpectedly large effects of the strong force, acting between the quarks
involved in the process.
Here we review the latest measurements of FCNC decays of b had-
rons and how these measurements are revealing potential cracks in the
standard model.+1.6
−10
and B(B 0 → µ+µ−) = (3.9−
1.4 ) × 10     . The statistical significances of the
hypothesis that the excess of data over the background is attributed to
signal are 6.2 and 3.0 standard deviations for the B0s and B 0 mode, respec-
tively. This represented the first observation of the B0s →​  μ+μ− decay, after
more than three decades of searching. Recently, the ATLAS collaboration
also published its results on the search for B0s →​  μ+μ− and B0 →​  μ+μ−
decays24, but no significant excess was observed in the signal region.
However, given the uncertainties related to these two sets of
measurements23,24, they are still compatible within each other. Moreover,
so far the measured branching fractions are in agreement with the stand-
ard model predictions. More data will make it possible to reduce
the uncertainty in the measurements and potentially reveal effects of
new physics.
Discovery of the decay B(0s ) →​  μ+μ−​
The purely leptonic decays of neutral B hadrons (B0s and B0, which com-
prise a beauty antiquark bound to a strange quark or a down quark,
respectively) into two muons are particularly rare b →​  sℓℓ transitions,
denoted B0(s ) →​  μ+μ−. These decays are suppressed not only by the GIM
mechanism, but also by angular momentum conservation and by the
chiral nature of the weak force (helicity suppression). This suppression
is not necessarily present for new-physics particles. For example13–16,
extensions of the standard model such as supersymmetry15,16 predict the
existence of additional Higgs bosons13,14 that can substantially enhance
the rate of these decays.
The standard model prediction17–20 of the relative probability of a B0s
or B0 meson decaying into two muons (the branching fraction) is calcu-
lated to be: B(B0s → µ+µ−) = (3.66 ± 0.23) × 10−9 and B(B 0 → µ+µ−)   =
(1.06 ± 0.09) × 10−10. These branching-fraction predictions are particu-
larly precise thanks to the purely leptonic final state, which reduces the
dependence on computations of the strong force. The decay B0 →​  μ+μ− is
a factor of 30 times rarer than its B0s counterpart, as down quarks couple
more weakly than do strange quarks to the top quark21,22.
A fit to the invariant mass of the dimuon candidates mμμ can be
performed to measure the yields of the B0s and B 0 signals. These yields
can then be used to determine the branching fractions of the B0s →​  μ+μ−
and B0 →​  μ+μ− decays. Figure 2 shows the invariant mass distribution of
mμμ, along with the fit result, identified in the CMS and LHCb data. The
+0.7
−9
measured branching fractions23 are: B(B0s → µ+µ−) = (2.8−
0.6 ) × 10
Semileptonic b →​  sℓℓ transitions
Another FCNC decay occurs when the b hadron is not annihilated (as in
the leptonic decay described above), but instead its beauty quark decays
into a new strange quark and two leptons. Such decays are not helicity-
suppressed, and so occur about 1,000 times more frequently than does
the B0(s ) →​  μ+μ− decay. This means that thousands of signal decays can
be collected, allowing for a more detailed study of their behaviour.
Branching fractions and lepton flavour universality
The simplest property to measure for these decays is the branching
fraction, as before. For semileptonic decays, the branching fraction is
measured as a function of the squared four-momentum transferred
to the two leptons, q2. This is important because the influence of new
physics—as well as theoretical uncertainties arising from strong-force
interactions—depends on q2.
The branching fraction has been measured as a function of q2 for
several types of b-hadron decays. For almost all of these channels,
the branching-fraction measurements sit below the theoretical
predictions25–27. While presenting an interesting pattern, these data
are not significant by themselves, because of the relatively large
theoretical uncertainties associated with the branching-fraction
predictions.
In addition, one can consider the ratio of branching fractions between
decays involving electrons and muons. Owing to its interaction with the
Higgs boson, the muon is 200 times heavier than the electron; but apart
from that it interacts in exactly the same way as the electron in the stand-
ard model. This concept is known as ‘lepton universality’. New particles
that are not predicted by the standard model do not have to follow this
behaviour, and so looking at the branching-fraction ratios is a very
sensitive way to search for physics beyond the standard model. In rare
b-hadron decays, the most well known example of these ratios is known
as RK: RK = B(B + → K+µ+µ−)/B(B + → K+e+e−)  . This ratio is known
to be unity in the standard model, with very high precision28,29. Any
measurement that deviates significantly from unity would be an unam-
biguous sign of physics beyond the standard model. The most precise
measurement of the ratio RK was performed by the LHCb collaboration30
+0.090
and was found to be RK=0.745−
0.074 ± 0.036   , where the first uncertainty
is statistical and the second systematic. The measurement is 2.6 standard
deviations below the standard model expectation of unity, implying an
excess of the decay involving electrons with respect to the muonic decay,
2 2 2 | NAT U R E | VO L 5 4 6 | 8 J u n e 2 0 1 7
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.Review RESEARCH
Data
Signal and background
B0s → P+P–
B0 → P+P–
Combinatorial background
Semileptonic background
Peaking background
14
12
10
8
6
Standard model predictions (ref. 38)
P+P– (ref. 35)
P+P– (ref. 36)
e+e– (ref. 36)
1
P′5
Candidates per 40 MeV/c2
16
0
4
2
0
5,000
5,200
5,400
mP+P– (MeV/c2)
5,600
5,800
Figure 2 | Observation of the decay B 0s → μ+μ−. The graph shows the
distribution of the dimuon invariant mass, mµ +µ −, as found in the
combined CMS and LHCb measurement23. Superimposed on the data
points (black dots) are the following: blue line, the fit obtained from the
combined signal-plus-background results; yellow area, the component of
the signal that results from the B0s decay; blue area, the component of the
signal that results from the B0 decay; dashed green line, the combinatorial
background made of a random combination of two muons produced by
independent sources; dashed red line, the sum of semileptonic background
decays; violet dashed line, the background obtained when the hadrons
from the decay B →​  hh′​are misidentified as muons. The excess of data seen
in the peak of this graph shows the discovery of the decay B0s →​  μ+μ−.
Image reproduced from ref. 23, Nature Publishing Group.
which is not predicted by the standard model. A powerful cross-check of
the analysis involves comparing the branching-fraction ratio of the nor-
malization channel B + →​  J /ψK+, where the J/ψ decays into electrons or
muons. This ratio is consistent with unity and gives confidence that the
experimentally detected differences in muons and electrons are well
understood30. The result is consistent with the measurements performed
by the BaBar31 and Belle32 collaborations, which are compatible with the
standard model.
In addition to studying b-hadron decays into a specific final state, one
can also consider the inclusive b →​  sℓℓ process, where the final state can
comprise any number of hadrons. The theoretical uncertainty in pre-
dicting this inclusive branching fraction is smaller than the uncertainty
in predicting a specific final state. The BaBar and Belle collaborations
have measured this process33,34, and the results are consistent with the
standard model prediction, albeit with larger experimental uncertainties
than for measurements of specific decays. These collaborations report the
branching fractions involving electrons and muons separately. However,
so far no significant discrepancy with lepton universality has been seen.
Angular analysis of the decay B →​  K∗ℓ+ℓ−
As well as influencing the rate of FCNC decays, particles in models
beyond the standard model can modify the distribution of the decay
products in space. In the standard model, the spatial distribution (or
‘angular distribution’) of the final-state particles from the FCNC decay
of the b hadron is precisely known. The angular distribution reflects the
nature of the virtual particle mediating the decay. For instance, if the b
hadron is stationary, a spin-0 (scalar) interaction will result in an isotropic
distribution of the products of the b-hadron decay. In contrast, a spin-1
interaction—which is either antisymmetric (vector) or symmetric (axial-
vector) under a parity (mirror reflection) transformation—will result
in the decay products concentrating in certain regions of space, owing
to the conservation of angular momentum in the decay. As a consequence,
the measurement of the angular distribution of the leptons in b →​  sℓℓ
transitions is sensitive not only to the presence of particles beyond the
standard model, but also to their spin.
The angular distribution of the decay B →​  K∗ℓ+ℓ− (where K∗ denotes
an excited state of a kaon that subsequently decays to a ground-state kaon
and a pion) is particularly sensitive to the effects of new physics, as one
–1
0
5
10
q2 (GeV2/c4)
15
Figure 3 | Measurements of the P ′5 observable in B → K∗ℓ+ℓ− decays.
P 5′ is a measure of the chiral asymmetry of the interference between the
transversely and longitudinally polarized amplitudes of the decay
B →​  K∗ℓ+ℓ−. Measurements of P 5′ are shown here as a function of the
squared four-momentum transferred to the leptons, q2. The q2 regions
around 9 GeV2/c4 and 12 GeV2/c4 have been removed owing to the
presence of narrow resonances resulting from charm–anticharm particles
(c  c), J/ψ and ψ(2S), respectively. In the q2 region just below the J/ψ
resonance (at 9 GeV2/c4), the observable P ′5 is measured to be less negative
than the standard model prediction. The filled black circles (muon (μ+
and μ−) final states) and orange squares (standard model predictions) are
reproduced from ref. 35, the latter based on data from ref. 38. The green
circles and blue triangles are from ref. 36 and show different measurements
performed for muon (μ+ and μ−) and electron (e+ and e−) final states,
respectively.
can measure the polarization of both the K∗ and the dimuon pair. In total
there are at least 16 independent measurable quantities (observables) that
∗
describe the decays of both B →​  K∗ℓ+ℓ− and its CP conjugate, B → K ℓ+ℓ−
decay (in CP symmetry, a particle is swapped for its antiparticle, and its
spatial coordinates are mirror-reflected). One example of these quantities
is the fraction of decays in which the K∗ is longitudinally polarized in
relation to the total decay rate; another is the difference between the
number of decays in which the muons are forward-moving or back-
ward-moving relative to the B momentum in the dimuon rest frame, again
as a fraction of the total decay rate. The measurements of all quantities
are performed in different regions of q2, because the influence of new
particles, and the theoretical uncertainties of the standard model predic-
tion, depends on q2.
The LHCb collaboration has performed measurements of all 16
observables35 for the muonic mode, B →​  K∗μ+μ−. Most of these meas-
urements, when taken individually, are compatible with the predictions
of the standard model. There are, however, some discrepancies. The quan-
tity P5′ is a measure of the chiral asymmetry of the interference between
the transversely and longitudinally polarized amplitudes of the decay
B →​  K∗ℓ+ℓ−. The measurements of P5′ in the q2 region just below the J/ψ
resonance show less negative values than those predicted by the standard
model (Fig. 3). For example, the two LHCb measurements closest
to the J/ψ region are 2.8 and 3.0 standard deviations away from the stand-
ard model predictions. The Belle collaboration has also measured this
quantity for the electronic and muonic modes36, both of which are com-
patible with the LHCb measurements and with lepton universality. The
dominant uncertainties of the measurements are statistical in nature and
are therefore expected to decrease with a larger dataset. For a more
exhaustive collection of recent experimental data from FCNC beauty
decays, see ref. 37; for standard model predictions, see ref. 38.
To maximize the sensitivity of these measurements to the effect of new
physics, a more rigorous approach is required. This involves combining
all measurements of B →​  K∗ℓ+ℓ− and other b →​  sℓℓ decays, inclu­ding
measurements of B0s →​  μ+μ− and B0 →​  μ+μ− transitions. By exploiting
the known correlations between all these measurements from theory and
8 J u n e 2 0 1 7 | VO L 5 4 6 | NAT U R E | 2 2 3
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.RESEARCH Review
a
b
b
W
s
P–P+
bs
Figure 4 | Illustration of an effective field theory for b → sℓ+ℓ− decays.
a, Feynman ‘penguin’ diagram for the transition of a b quark (left) into an
s quark (right) according to the standard model; this transition is realised
by the exchange of a virtual W boson and a virtual top quark (t), which
radiate a virtual photon (γ) or a virtual Z0 boson, in turn producing a
couple of muons of opposite charge. b, Feynman diagram for the same
transition using an effective theory description, in which the b →​  sℓ+ℓ−
process can be described by a diagram that does not depend on the top
quark, or on the W and Z0 bosons.
looking for a pattern in the observed discrepancies, a clearer picture of
potential new-physics effects can be formed.
Interpretation
3
2
NP)
Re( 10
J, Z0
t
4
P+
P–
1
0
–1
The energy scale of b-hadron decays is set by the mass of the initial
b quark, which is approximately 5 GeV. However, the particles involved
in the quantum-loop transition of the GIM mechanism, such as the
W boson and the top quark, have physical masses of around 100 GeV.
Decays of hadrons through FCNC transitions can therefore be described
by an effective theory39, which does not explicitly depend on the degrees
of freedom of, for instance, the top quark and the W and Z0 bosons that
become relevant at higher energy scales (Fig. 4). Instead, the effects
of such contributions are described in terms of quantum-mechanical
operators: Wilson operators40, which encode the Lorentz structure of a
particular interaction; and Wilson coefficients, which give the strength
of the interaction.
The operators that contribute depend on the specific decay that is being
analysed. For example, the Wilson operator O9 describes the b →​  sℓℓ
decay mediated by vector interaction, whereas O10 corresponds to an
axial-vector interaction. The strength of each interaction is expressed
in terms of corresponding Wilson coefficients, C9 and C10. Deviations of
C9 or C10 from their standard model expectations would not only indicate
the presence of one or more new particles mediating the decay, but also
provide information about the spin of those particles.
Global analyses
The challenge in predicting the behaviour of semileptonic b →​  sℓℓ decays
is related to the part of the decay that is mediated by the strong force,
which is responsible for the dynamics of the initial-state and final-state
hadrons. The effects of the strong force in these decays cannot be deter-
mined within the framework of perturbation theory and are therefore
difficult to calculate, unlike the effects of the electroweak force. These
strong-force effects introduce relatively large uncertainties in measure-
ments such as the branching fractions of b →​  sℓℓ decays. To minimize the
impact of these uncertainties, ratios of observables are constructed that
partially cancel the uncertainties related to the strong force. The angular
observable P5′ is such a construction, formed from the ratio of decay
amplitudes, and has asmaller uncertainty than do the individual ampli-
tudes themselves41. The degree of cancellation is an important point, and
is what the residual theoretical uncertainty depends most heavily upon.
Another key feature of these global analyses is the use of the comple-
mentarity between different measurements. For example, the branching
fraction of B0s →​  μ+μ− is mediated in the standard model by an axial-
vector interaction, and so is sensitive to the Wilson coefficient C10
squared. The semileptonic b →​  sℓℓ transitions have both vector and axial-
vector contributions, and their branching fractions are sensitive to the
sum of C10 squared and C9 squared. Angular observables are sensitive to
various combinations, depending on the particular observable that is
being studied. By combining all information, the values of all the different
Wilson coefficients can be deduced. The result for C9 and C10 is shown in
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
Re( NP
9 )
Figure 5 | Global fit of rare beauty decays. Global fit for new-physics
contributions to the real part of the vector and axial-vector Wilson
NP
. The contours indicate 68% (inner contours) and
coefficients, C 9NP and C10
95% (outer contours) confidence regions. The red contours show the
constraints from angular analysis; the green contours show the constraints
from branching-fraction measurements; and the blue contours show the
combination of all information. The experimental measurements
demonstrate a sizable negative contribution of new physics to C9. Image
reproduced from ref. 54, Springer.
Fig. 5, and indicates that a significantly negative contribution to the stand-
ard model value for C9 is preferred. Globally, the likelihood that there is
an additional contribution to C9 is supported to around three to four
standard deviations, depending on the analysis and on which observables
are included12,38,42–54. This significance includes both experimental and
theoretical uncertainties.
A significant variation from the standard model of more than three
standard deviations corresponds to a P value of less than 0.3%. In particle
physics, the statistical significance that is needed to claim a discovery is
more stringent, being at the level of five standard deviations, or a P value
of less than one in a million. This strict definition of observation is used
because hundreds of analyses are performed in high-energy physics each
year. Over a period of time, it is inevitable that a few discrepancies of
three standard deviations will appear. What is encouraging here is that the
global significance is driven by different smaller discrepancies, which are
based on different experimental and theoretical systematic uncertainties.
Nevertheless, it is important to remain cautious when interpreting the
results.
Interpretation beyond the standard model
The deviations described above with respect to the standard model
predictions could be explained by the existence of a new particle, not pre-
dicted by the standard model, whose contribution to the decay amplitude
destructively interferes with the standard model diagram. If this particle
were also to interact differently with electrons and with muons, it could
also explain the deviation seen in RK. There is a multitude of new-physics
models that could explain some or all of these anomalies. Here we give
two well studied examples.
One example of an extension to the standard model that could explain
these deviations involves a heavy version of the Z0 boson, denoted Z′​
(refs 43, 51). Such an extension to the model must satisfy direct searches
for such particles at the CMS and ATLAS experiments, which in practice
means either that the Z′​candidate must be at least 30 times heavier than
the standard model Z0 boson, or that it must have small couplings to the
2 2 4 | NAT U R E | VO L 5 4 6 | 8 J u n e 2 0 1 7
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.Review RESEARCH
up and down quarks. If the Z′​is very heavy, it would not have a sizable
impact on the decay compared with the standard model contribution,
unless it could change the flavour of quarks directly without going
through a quantum-loop transition. This model has consequences for
other flavour observables, such as B0s oscillations, where the B0s hadron
could annihilate to produce a Z′​boson, which would then decay to
0
B s . The interesting outcome of these Z′​models is that there is room
to satisfy all existing experimental constraints and explain all
b →​  sℓℓ anomalies. If such a hypothesis were confirmed, it would it
be a major breakthrough in particle physics and could be the first
real step towards addressing any of the outstanding questions in fun-
damental physics55.
Another proposed particle that could explain the deviations from the
standard model is a leptoquark56—which, as the name suggests, carries
quantum numbers of both quarks and leptons and can directly couple to
the two. Here, typical solutions require a leptoquark that couples more
strongly to the second and third generations of decay than to the first.
This hierarchical flavour structure can naturally explain the lepton non-
universality ratio RK, and could be related to other hints of lepton
non-universality seen in other b-hadron decays57,58. Interestingly, there
are some models (see, for example, ref. 59) that predict a leptoquark mass
of around 1 TeV, which with some luck could be directly observed at
the LHC.
Interpretation within the standard model
As well as undergoing the FCNC process, the b hadron can decay into
a final state containing a strange hadron and a pair of muons, via the
process B →​  K∗​J/ψ, with the J/ψ often decaying into two muons. As this
decay (B →​  K∗​J/ψ then J/ψ →​  μ+μ−) shares the same final state as the
signal decay B →​  K∗​μ +μ −, the two processes undergo quantum-
mechanical interference, which can mimic the effects of physics beyond
the standard model. As discussed above, the strong interaction at the
energy scale corresponding to the B-hadron mass is difficult to compute
theoretically. The strong interaction for the process B →​  K∗​J/ψ with
J/ψ →​  μ+μ− is particularly difficult to calculate, because this process
receives much larger contributions from the strong force than does the
FCNC B →​  K∗​μ+μ− decay.
The decay of a b hadron into a final state containing a strange hadron
and a pair of muons proceeds via the J/ψ and the ψ(2S) hadrons
(an excited state of J/ψ) 99% of the time. The branching fractions of these
decays are known to a relative precision of 5%, which constrains the size
of the interference with the FCNC decay. However, an additional com-
plication arises owing to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which
relates the lifetime of a hadron to its mass-energy. The short lifetime of
the J/ψ hadron results in a small but non-negligible spread of possible
values of mass that this hadron can have before it decays. Such a spread
is known as the ‘natural width’ of the hadron. The problem therefore lies
in considering the effect of the interference between the FCNC decay
B0 →​  K∗0μ+μ− and the B0 →​  K∗0J/ψ decay, with the latter being very far
away from the nominal mass of the J/ψ hadron.
The discrepancy in P5′ between measurements and the standard model
predictions is localized in a q2 region approximately 1,000 natural widths
away from the nominal J/ψ mass. The effect of this resonance in this
region depends on the level of quantum-mechanical interference between
the FCNC decay and the decay involving a J/ψ hadron. In global analyses
of b →​  sℓℓ transitions, this interference is estimated using the method
described in refs 60 and 61, which relies on a non-perturbative quantum-
chromodynamics calculation, starting at low q2 values and extrapolated
to higher q2 values using knowledge of the spectrum of hadronic states,
such as the J/ψ and ψ(2S) hadrons. Given the difficulties in calculating
these contributions, there is much discussion in the field regarding
whether the level of the interference between the FCNC decay and the decay
involving the J/ψ hadron could result in the discrepancies seen in P5′ .
Disentangling this effect from the more exotic explanation enlisting new
particles is of the highest priority for both experimental and theoretical
particle physicists.
Summary and outlook
FCNC decays continue to play an important part in understanding
the fundamental forces of nature. Not only have they been crucial in
the development of the standard model, the present set of discrepan-
cies also provides evidence for new particles that would extend the
standard model and could lead to a more complete description of
particle physics. At the moment, however, this evidence is intriguing
but inconclusive, and the most important question now is whether
these discrepancies could instead be explained by a combination of
statistical fluctuations and contributions by charmoniums (such as
the J/ψ hadron). The former possibility will be addressed with the
increased dataset collected at the LHC during 2015 to 2018, which is
expected to be four times larger than the dataset used in the measure-
ments described here. The larger dataset would also allow a more
precise test of the q2 dependence of the P5′ discrepancy—a character-
istic that would be present only if the deviation were due to hadronic
interactions.
As well as obtaining more data, there is a specific analysis that could
help to shed light on the observed discrepancies from standard model
predictions. This would involve measuring the level of quantum-mechanical
interference between the FCNC decay and the decay that proceeds via
charmonium states. Such a measurement would be crucial to understanding
the validity of theoretical predictions of this quantity, and therefore of
standard model predictions of b →​  sℓℓ processes. We note that the axial-
vector Wilson coefficient, C10, is not affected by the interference of the
FCNC decay with decays involving charmonium states. In global fits to
the Wilson coefficients, there is a solution in which the contribution of
new physics to C9 and to C10 is equal in magnitude. If this scenario were
realized, then one would expect the branching fraction of B0s →​  μ+μ−
decay to remain lower than the standard model prediction, and that devi-
ations would start appearing in other angular observables of
B0 →​  K∗0μ+μ− decays.
Another type of analysis—which avoids complicated discussion of
hadronic uncertainties—requires measurements that test the hypothesis
of lepton universality. Measurements of b →​  sℓℓ processes that involve
other hadrons in the final state (for example, measurements of R K ∗ )
should soon provide a valuable piece to this puzzle, as well as improving
the precision of RK measurement with more data. Moreover, with more
data, an angular analysis of final states that comprise electrons can be
performed, as in ref. 36. If the angular distribution of B0 →​  K∗0e+e− is
significantly different from that of B0 →​  K∗0μ+μ−, it would be an unam-
biguous signal of new physics.
Looking further ahead, an upgrade of the Belle experiment, Belle II
(ref. 62), is being commissioned at the moment. Over its lifetime—from
2018 to 2025—it will collect 50 times more data than its predecessor.
The Belle II experiment will be particularly important for further
testing lepton universality in b →​  sℓℓ decays, but also for measuring
the decay properties of the inclusive b →​  sℓℓ process. The standard
model predictions of inclusive decays have different theoretical uncer-
tainties to those of the decays to specific final states described here.
Therefore, inclusive b →​  sℓℓ measurements could help to disentangle
new-physics and standard model interpretations of the observed
discrepancies.
The LHCb, CMS and ATLAS detectors will also undergo upgrades,
increasing the number of signal decays collected by at least a factor of
30 compared with those described here. The motivation for such a dataset
is clear. In the pessimistic scenario that the anomalies discussed fade with
time owing to statistical variations, then the largest possible dataset will
be needed to reveal smaller putative contributions from new physics. If
instead the more optimistic scenario is realized—that these anomalies
remain—then a huge dataset from these decays would allow a detailed
study of the exact model behind these new-physics effects, and of whether
such a model could address any of the outstanding questions in funda-
mental physics.
