Review
doi:10.1038/nature22346
A challenge to lepton universality in
B-meson decays
Gregory Ciezarek1, Manuel Franco Sevilla2, Brian Hamilton3, Robert Kowalewski4, Thomas Kuhr5, Vera Lüth6 & Yutaro Sato7
One of the key assumptions of the standard model of particle physics is that the interactions of the charged leptons, namely
electrons, muons and taus, differ only because of their different masses. Whereas precision tests comparing processes
involving electrons and muons have not revealed any definite violation of this assumption, recent studies of B-meson
decays involving the higher-mass tau lepton have resulted in observations that challenge lepton universality at the level
of four standard deviations. A confirmation of these results would point to new particles or interactions, and could have
profound implications for our understanding of particle physics.
M
ore than 70 years of particle physics research have led to an
elegant and concise theory of particle interactions at the sub-
nuclear level, commonly referred to as the standard model1,2.
On the basis of information extracted from experiments, theorists have
combined the theory of electroweak interactions with quantum chro-
modynamics, the theory of strong interactions, and experiments have
validated this theory to an extraordinary degree. Any observation that is
proven to be inconsistent with standard model assumptions would sug-
gest a new type of interaction or particle.
In the framework of the standard model of particle physics, the fun-
damental building blocks, quarks and leptons, are each grouped in three
generations of two members each. The three generations of charged
leptons—the electron (e−), the muon (μ−) and the tau (τ−)—are each
paired with an electrically neutral lepton, a very low mass neutrino,
νe, νμ and ντ, respectively. The electron, a critical component of matter, was
discovered by Thomson3 in 1897. The discovery of the muon in cosmic
rays by Anderson and Neddermeyer4 in 1937 came as a surprise. Similarly
surprising was the first observation of τ+τ− pair production by Perl et al.5
at the SPEAR e+e− storage ring in 1975. As far as we know, all leptons are
point-like particles, that is, they have no substructure.
The three generations are ordered by the mass of the charged lepton,
which ranges from 0.511 MeV for e± to 105 MeV for μ± and to 1,777 MeV
for τ± (ref. 6). These different masses lead to vastly different lifetimes, from
the stable electron to 2.2 μs for muons, and to 0.29 ps for taus. Charged
leptons participate in electromagnetic and weak interactions, but not in
strong interactions, whereas neutrinos only undergo weak interactions.
The standard model assumes that these interactions of the charged and
neutral leptons are universal, that is, the same for the three generations.
Precision tests of lepton universality have been performed over many
years by many experiments. To date no definite violation of lepton uni-
versality has been observed. Among the most precise tests is a comparison
of the decay rates of K mesons, that is, K− → e−νe versus K− → µ−νµ
(ref. 7). (Unless stated otherwise, the inclusion of charged-conjugate states
and decay modes is implied here and in the following.) Furthermore,
taking into account precision measurements of the tau and muon masses
and lifetimes and the decay rates τ − → e−νeντ and µ− → e−νeνµ , the equality
of the weak coupling strengths of the tau and muon was confirmed6. On
the other hand, a recent determination of the proton (p) radius, derived
from very precise measurements of the Lamb shift in muonic hydrogen
atoms8, differs by about 4% from measurements of normal hydrogen
atoms and e–p scattering data. Studies of the origin of this puzzling
  
difference are underway9. They are aimed at a better understanding of
the proton radius and structure, and may reveal details of the true impact
of muons and electrons on these interactions.
Recent studies have focused on purely leptonic decays of B mesons of
the form B− → τ −ντ and semileptonic B decays such as B → D (∗)ℓ −νℓ   ,
with ℓ = e, μ or τ, and where D(*) refers to a low-mass charm meson, D or
D*. These studies have resulted in observations that seem to challenge
lepton universality. These weak decays involving leptons are well under-
stood in the framework of the standard model, and therefore offer a
unique opportunity to search for unknown phenomena and processes
involving new particles: for instance, a yet undiscovered charged partner
of the Higgs boson10. Such searches have been performed on data col-
lected by three different experiments: the LHCb experiment at the pp
collider at CERN in Europe, and the BaBar and Belle experiments at e+e−
colliders in the USA and in Japan, respectively.
Measurements by these three experiments favour larger than expected
rates for semileptonic B decays involving τ leptons. Currently, the com-
bined significance of these results is at the level of four standard devi-
ations, and the fact that all three experiments report an unexpected
enhancement has drawn considerable attention. A confirmation of
this violation of lepton universality and an explanation in terms of
new-physics processes would be very exciting. In the following, we
present details of the experimental techniques and preliminary studies
to understand the observed effects, along with prospects of improved
sensitivity and complementary measurements at current and future
facilities.
Standard model predictions of B-meson decay rates
According to the standard model, purely leptonic and semileptonic decays
of B mesons are mediated by the W− boson, as shown schematically
in Fig. 1. B mesons are assumed to be composed of a b-quark and an
antiquark (anti-u or anti-d), either B−(b, u ) or B 0(b, d ), whereas charm
mesons (the spin-0 D and spin-1 D* state) contain a c-quark and an anti-
quark (anti-u or anti-d), D 0(∗)(c, u ) or D +(∗)(c, d ).
For purely leptonic B- decays, the standard model prediction of the
total decay rate Γ, which depends critically on the lepton mass squared
m2ℓ , is:
Γ SM(B− → ℓ −νℓ ) =
2

G2FmBm2ℓ
m2 
|Vub|2 1 − 2ℓ  f 2B

8π
mB 
(1)
1
Nikhef National Institute for Subatomic Physics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 2University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA. 3University of Maryland, College
Park, Maryland 20742, USA. 4University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia V8P 5C2, Canada. 5Ludwig Maximilians University, 80539 Munich, Germany. 6SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory,
Stanford, California 94309, USA. 7Kobayashi-Maskawa Institute, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.
8 J u n e 2 0 1 7 | VO L 5 4 6 | NAT U R E | 2 2 7
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.RESEARCH Review
a
–
Vub
b
B–
W–
ū
RSM
D∗ =
B-meson production and detection
b
Q̄
Vcb
W–
B–, B¯ 0
c
ū, d̄
D0,(∗), D+,(∗)
ū, d̄
Figure 1 | Diagrams for standard-model decay processes. a, B− → ℓ −νℓ ,
with a purely leptonic final state. b, B → D (∗)ℓ −νℓ , involving a charm
meson (D or D*) and lepton pair and mediated by a vector boson (W−).
Vub and Vcb refer to the quark mixing parameters in b → u and b → c
transitions (commonly referred to as CKM parameters13).
The first factor contains the Fermi constant GF = 1.1663797 × 10−5 GeV−2
and the B-meson mass, mB = 5.279 GeV. All hadronic effects, due to the
binding of quarks inside the meson, are encapsulated in the decay con-
stant fB. Recent lattice quantum chromodynamics calculations11 predict
fB = (0.191 ± 0.009) GeV. Taking into account the current world averages
for the B− lifetime, τB = (1.638 ± 0.004) ps (ref. 12), and the quark mixing
parameter13 for b → u transitions, |Vub| (ref. 14), the expected branching
fraction, that is, the frequency of this decay relative to all decay modes, is
(ref. 15, and recent updates at http://ckmfitter.in2p3.fr):
−4
B SM(B− → τ −ντ ) = (0.75±00..10
05) × 10
(2)
Decays to the lower-mass charged leptons, e− and μ−, are strongly sup-
pressed by spin effects and have not yet been observed.
The differential decay rate, dΓ, for semileptonic decays involving D(*)
mesons depends on both m2ℓ and q2, the invariant mass squared of the
lepton pair16:
2
∗
2
m2 
dΓ SM(B → D (∗)ℓ −νℓ ) GF|Vcb| |p D (∗) |q 
=
1 − 2ℓ 
2
2
3
q 
dq
96π m

B

2
2
Universal and phase space factors



m2  3m2
× (|H+|2 + |H−|2 + |H0|2 )1 + ℓ2  + 2ℓ |Hs|2 

2q  2q
 
(3)
Hadronic effects
The first factor is universal for all semileptonic B decays, containing a
quark flavour mixing parameter13, in this case |Vcb| (ref. 14) for b → c
quark transitions, and p∗D (∗), the 3-momentum of the hadron in the B rest
frame, in this case a D or D* meson. The four helicity amplitudes H+, H−,
H0 and Hs capture the impact of hadronic effects. (Helicity refers to the
component of the angular momentum of a particle parallel to the direc-
tion of its momentum.) They depend on the spin of the charm meson and
on q2. The kinematic range, m2ℓ ≤ q2 ≤ (mB − m D (∗))2 , is sensitive to the
lepton mass mℓ and the charm meson mass m D∗. The much larger mass
of the τ not only affects the rate, but also the kinematics of the decays via
the Hs amplitude. All four amplitudes contribute to B → D ∗ℓ −νℓ , while
only H0 and Hs contribute to B → Dℓ −νℓ , which leads to a higher sensi-
tivity of this decay mode to the scalar contribution Hs.
Measurements of the ratios of semileptonic branching fractions remove
the dependence on |Vcb|, lead to a partial cancellation of theoretical uncer-
tainties related to hadronic effects, and reduce the impact of experimental
uncertainties. Current standard model predictions17–19 are:
B(B → Dτ −ντ )
RSM
= 0.300 ± 0.008
D =
B(B → De−νe )
(5)
The predicted ratios relative to B(B → D∗µ−νµ) are identical within the
quoted precision.
Q̄
–
b
B(B → D∗τ −ντ )
= 0.252 ± 0.003
B(B → D∗e−νe )
(4)
B-meson decays have been studied at pp and e+e− colliding beam facilities
operating at very different beam energies. The e+e− colliders operated at
a fixed energy of 10.579 GeV in the years 1999 to 2010. At this energy,
about 20 MeV above the kinematic threshold for BB production,
e+ and e− annihilate and produce a particle, commonly referred to
as ϒ (4S), which decays almost exclusively to B+B− or B 0B 0 pairs. The
maximum production rate for these ϒ (4S) → BB events of 20 Hz was
achieved at KEK (the High Energy Accelerator Research Organization in
Tsukuba, Japan), compared to the multi-hadron non-BB background rate
of about 80 Hz.
B mesons from ϒ (4S) decays have very low momenta, about 300 MeV,
and therefore their decay products are distributed almost isotropically in
the rest frame of the ϒ (4S). For this reason, the BaBar20,21 and Belle22
detectors were designed to cover close to 90% of the total solid angle,
thereby enabling the reconstruction of all final state particles from decays
of the two B mesons, except for neutrinos. Both detectors consist of cylin-
drical layers of sensors surrounding the beam pipe, plus endcaps to cover
the small polar angles. Constraints from energy-momentum conservation
allow events containing a single neutrino to be discriminated from those
containing multiple undetected particles. This feature also allows for an
effective suppression of non-BB background and misreconstructed
events.
The LHC pp collider operated at total energies of 7 TeV and 8 TeV from
2008 to 2012. In inelastic pp collisions, high-energy gluons, the carriers of
the strong force between the quarks inside the protons, collide and pro-
duce a pair of B hadrons (mesons or baryons) along with a large number
of other charged and neutral particles, in roughly one of every hundred
pp interactions. The B hadrons are typically produced at small angles to
the beam and with high momenta. These features determined the design
of the LHCb detector23,24, a single-arm forward spectrometer, covering
the polar angle range of 3°–23°. The high momentum and relatively long
B hadron lifetime result in decay distances of several centimetres. Very
precise measurements of the pp interaction point, combined with the
detection of charged particle trajectories from B decays which do not
intersect this point, are the very effective, primary method to separate B
decays from background.
All three experiments rely on several layers of finely segmented silicon
strip detectors to locate the beam–beam interaction point and decay ver-
tices of long-lived particles. A combination of silicon strip detectors and
multiple layers of gaseous detectors measure the trajectories of charged
particles, and determine their momenta from the deflection in a magnetic
field. Examples of reconstructed signal events recorded by the LHCb and
Belle experiments are shown in Fig. 2.
For a given momentum, charged particles of different masses, primarily
pions and kaons, are identified by their different velocities. All three
experiments make use of devices that sense Cherenkov radiation, which
is emitted by particles with velocities that exceed the speed of light in a
chosen radiator material. For lower-velocity particles, Belle complements
this with time-of-flight measurements. BaBar and Belle also measure the
velocity-dependent energy loss due to ionization in the tracking detectors.
Arrays of caesium iodide crystals measure the energy of photons and
identify electrons in BaBar and Belle. Muons are identified as particles
penetrating a stack of steel absorbers interleaved with large area gaseous
detectors.
Measurements of B−→τ−   ντ decays
The decays B− → τ −ντ with two or three neutrinos in the final state have
only been observed by the BaBar and Belle collaborations. These two
experiments exploit the BB pair production at the ϒ (4S) resonance via
2 2 8 | NAT U R E | VO L 5 4 6 | 8 J u n e 2 0 1 7
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.Review RESEARCH
a
b
p–p
1m
B0
QW
D0
S+
Qe
P–
K–
S+
K–
1m
S+
e–
QW
3m
Figure 2 | Belle and LHCb single-event displays illustrating the
reconstruction of semileptonic B-meson decays. Trajectories of charged
particles are shown as coloured solid lines; energy deposits in the
calorimeters are depicted by red bars. a, The Belle display is an end view
perpendicular to the beam axis, with the silicon detector in the centre
(small orange circle) and the device measuring the particle velocity (dark
purple polygon). This is a ϒ (4S) → B+B− event, with B− → D 0τ −ντ ,
D0 → K−π+ and τ − → e−ντνe , and the B+ decaying to five charged particles
(white solid lines) and two photons. The trajectories of undetectedneutrinos are marked as dashed yellow lines. b, The LHCb display is a side
view, with the proton beams indicated as a white horizontal line with the
interaction point far to the left, followed by the dipole magnet (white
trapezoid) and the Cherenkov detector (red lines). The area close to the
interaction point is enlarged above, showing the tracks of the charged
particles produced in the pp interaction, the B0 path (dotted orange line),
and its decay B 0 → D∗+τ −ντ , with D*+ → D0π+ and D0 → K−π+, plus the
μ− from the decay of a very short-lived τ−.
the process e+e− → ϒ (4S) → BB . These BB pairs can be tagged by the
reconstruction of a hadronic or semileptonic decay of one of the two B
mesons, referred to as Btag. If this decay is correctly reconstructed, all
remaining particles in the event originate from the other B decay, either
a signal leptonic or semileptonic B decay or another B decay passing the
selection criteria.
The BaBar and Belle collaborations have independently developed two
sets of algorithms to tag BB events. The hadronic tag algorithms25,26
search for the best match between one of more than a thousand possible
decay chains and a subset of all detected particles in the event. The
­efficiency for finding a correctly matched Btag is unfortunately quite small,
0.3%. The benefit of reconstructing all final state particles is that the total
energy, Emiss, and momentum vector, pmiss, of all undetected particles of
the other B decay can be inferred from energy and momentum
­conservation. The invariant mass squared of all undetected particles,
m2miss = E 2miss − p2miss , is used to distinguish events with one neutrino
(m2miss ≈ 0) from events with multiple neutrinos or other missing particles
(m2miss >0). The semileptonic tag algorithms exploit the large branching
fractions for B decays involving a charm meson, a charged lepton and
associated neutrino, B → D (∗)ℓ +νℓ , with ℓ+ = e+, μ+. The efficiency for
finding these tag decays is about 1%. However, the presence of the
­neutrino leads to weaker constraints on the Btag and signal B decay.
Measurements of B− → τ −ντ decays are based on leptonic τ decays,
τ − → e−νeντ and τ − → µ−νµντ , and on semileptonic τ decays, τ− → π−ντ
and τ− → π−π0ντ, which together account for 70% of all τ− decays. Thus,
the signature for signal events is a single charged particle, either a charged
lepton, a π−, or a π− accompanied by a π0, plus a Btag.
The presence of multiple neutrinos precludes the use of kinematic con-
straints to effectively suppress backgrounds from other B decays. A vari­
able that is sensitive to backgrounds with additional photons or
undetected charged particles due to efficiency and acceptance losses is
Eextra, the sum of the energy deposits in the calorimeter which are not
associated with the tag or signal B decay. Figure 3 shows a Eextra distribu-
tion measured by the Belle collaboration for a subset of events withτ− → π−ντ. Signal events have low values of Eextra, while background
events extend to higher values. The signal yield is determined from a fit
to the data using signal and background distributions based on data
­control samples and Monte Carlo simulation. The sum of the fitted signal
yields for the four subsamples of purely leptonic and semileptonic τ
decays, corrected for the efficiency of the tag and signal B decays, is used
to determine the B− → τ −ντ branching fraction.
As shown in Fig. 4, current measurements by the Belle27,28 and
BaBar29,30 collaborations are of limited precision owing to very small
signal samples and high backgrounds, and uncertainties in the Btag
70
Events per 0.05 GeV
60
50
Data
Fit
Non BB background
BB background
Signal
40
30
20
10
0
0.0
0.5
Eextra (GeV)
1.0
Figure 3 | Extraction of the B− → τ − ντ yield from Belle data. Shown,
for a subset of events with τ− → π−ντ candidates (solid histogram), is the
result of a fit to the Eextra distribution (data points with statistical errors)
for the sum of signal and backgrounds from BB and non-BB events27. The
green histogram at the bottom indicates the predicted signal distribution.
Image adapted from ref. 27, American Physical Society.
8 J u n e 2 0 1 7 | VO L 5 4 6 | NAT U R E | 2 2 9
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.RESEARCH Review
a
b
BaBar (ST)1.7 ± 0.8
BaBar (HT)1.83 –0.55
Belle (ST)1.25 ± 0.39
Belle (HT)+0.29
0.72 –0.27
c
+0.58
0.440 ± 0.072
0.332 ± 0.030
0.302 ± 0.032
0.375 ± 0.069
0.293 ± 0.041
0.336 ± 0.040
LHCb
0
1
2
3
(B– → W– QW) (10–4)
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure 4 | Comparison of measurements with standard model
predictions. a–c, Shown are the branching fraction B(B− → τ −ντ ) (a), and
the ratios RD (b) and R D∗ (c) measured by the BaBar26,29,30, Belle27,28,32,33
and LHCb34 collaborations. The data points indicate statistical and total
uncertainties. ST and HT refer to the measurements with semileptonic andhadronic tags, respectively. The average values of the measurements and
their combined uncertainties, obtained by the Heavy Flavor Averaging
Group31,39, are shown in red as vertical lines and bands, and the expectations
from the standard model calculations15,17,18 are shown in blue.
e­ fficiencies. The combination of these four measurements constitutes
the first observation of a purely leptonic B− decay. Whereas the early
measurements favoured somewhat larger values, the current average31 ofBelle collaboration performs a one-dimensional fit to the m2miss distribu-
tion in the low-m2miss region (m2miss <0.85GeV 2) dominated by the nor-
malization decays, combined with a fit to a multivariate classifier in the
high-m2miss region. This classifier includes m2miss, E ∗ℓ , Eextra, and additional
kinematic variables.
Figure 5 shows one-dimensional projections of the data and the fitted
contributions from signal, normalization, and background decays. For
BaBar (and likewise for Belle), the m2miss distributions show a narrow peak
at zero (Fig. 5a, d), dominated by normalization decays with a single neu-
trino, whereas the signal events with three neutrinos extend to about
10 GeV2. For B → Dℓ −ντ decays, there is a sizeable contribution from
B → D ∗ℓ −ντ decays, for which the pion or photon from the D* → Dπ or
D* → Dγ decay was not reconstructed. For LHCb, the peak at zero is
somewhat broader and has a long tail into the signal region (Fig. 5h)
because of the sizeable uncertainty in the estimation of the Bsig
momentum. The E ∗ℓ distributions (Fig. 5c, f, i) provide additional discri­
mination, since a lepton from a normalization decay has a higher average
momentum than a lepton originating from a secondary τ − → ℓ −ντνℓ
decay in signal B decays.
Among the background contributions, semileptonic B decays to D**
mesons (charm mesons of higher mass than the D* mesons) are of con-
cern, primarily because their branching fractions are not well known.
These D** states decay to a D or D* meson plus additional particles that,
if not reconstructed, contribute to the missing momentum of the decay.
As a result, B → D ∗∗ℓ −νℓ decays have a broader m2miss distribution than
do normalization decays. They can be distinguished from signal decays
by their E ∗ℓ distributions which extend to higher values. At LHCb, an
important background arises from B → D(*)HcX decays, where Hc is a
charm hadron decaying either leptonically or semileptonically, and X
refers to additional low-mass hadrons, if present. These decays produce
m2miss and E ∗ℓ spectra that are similar to those of signal events (Fig. 5h, i).
Figure 4 shows the measured values for RD and R D∗ by the BaBar26,
Belle32,33 and LHCb34 collaborations. These results include a recent
­measurement of R D∗ by Belle that uses a semileptonic tag, but do not
include earlier results from BaBar35,36 and Belle37,38 based on partial
­datasets. The averages of the measurements39 are
B(B− → τ −ντ )=(1.06 ± 0.19) ×10−4
(6)
is compatible with the standard model prediction (equation (1)), which
is lower by 1.4 standard deviations.
Measurements of B → D(*)τ−   ντ decays​
As defined in equations (4) and (5), R D (∗) corresponds to the ratio of
branching fractions for B → D (∗)τ −ντ (signal) and B → D (∗)ℓ −ντ (normali­
zation). BaBar and Belle events containing such decays are selected by
requiring a hadronic Btag, a D or D* meson, and a charged lepton
ℓ− = e−, μ−. Charged and neutral D candidates are reconstructed from
combinations of pions and kaons with invariant masses compatible with
the D meson mass. The higher-mass D*0 and D*+ mesons are identified
by their D* → Dπ and D* → Dγ decays. In signal decays, the lepton ℓ−
originates from the τ − → ℓ −ντνℓ decay, leading to a final state with three
neutrinos and resulting in a broad m2miss distribution, while in normali-
zation decays the lepton originates from the B decay with a single neutrino
and therefore m2miss ≈ 0 . Non-BB backgrounds and misreconstructed
events are greatly suppressed by the Btag reconstruction. The remaining
background is further reduced by multivariate selections.
0
At LHCb, only decays of B mesons producing a μ− and D*+ meson
are selected. Muons are favoured over electrons because of their higher
detection efficiency and momentum resolution. The D*+ meson is recon-
structed exclusively in D*+ → D0(→K−π+)π+ decays. B mesons produced
at LHCb have a flight path of the order of 1 cm. This feature is exploited
to reject the bulk of the background, by requiring that the charged parti-
cles from the B candidate and no other tracks originate from a common
vertex that is significantly separated from the pp collision point. The
reduction in signal efficiency due to the use of a single decay chain is
compensated by the very large production rate of B mesons at the LHC.
The direction of the B momentum is inferred from the reconstructed pp
collision point and the D*+μ− vertex, but its magnitude is unknown.
LHCb approximates the B momentum by equating its component parallel
to the beam axis to that of the D*+μ− combination, rescaled by the ratio
of the B mass to the measured D*+μ− mass.
The yields for the signal, normalization, and various background con-
tributions are determined by maximum likelihood fits to the observed
data distributions. Control samples are used to validate the simulated
distributions and constrain the size and kinematic features of the back-
ground contributions.
All three experiments rely on the variables m2miss, E ∗ℓ (the energy of the
charged lepton in the B rest frame) and q2. BaBar and Belle restrict the
data to q2 > 4 GeV2 to enhance the contribution from signal decays. BaBar
performs the fit in two dimensions whereas LHCb covers the whole q2
range in four intervals, thus performing a fully three-dimensional fit. The
RD = 0.397 ± 0.040stat ± 0.028syst(7)
R D∗ = 0.316 ± 0.016 stat ± 0.010syst(8)
Both values exceed the standard model expectations. Taking into account
the correlations (Fig. 6), the combined difference between the measured
and expected values has a significance of about four standard deviations.
Interpretations of results
The results presented here have attracted the attention of the physics
community, and have resulted in several potential explanations of this
apparent violation of lepton universality for decays involving the τ lepton.
2 3 0 | NAT U R E | VO L 5 4 6 | 8 J u n e 2 0 1 7
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.Review RESEARCH
800
a
b
BaBar
0
–2
–1
0
1
2
m2miss (GeV2)
20,000 g –0.40 < q2 < 2.85 GeV2
3
15,000
10,000
5,000
–2
–1
0
1
2
m2miss (GeV2)
LHCb
3
100
150 e
100
0
–2
4,000
0
h
2
4
6
m2miss (GeV2)
q2 > 9.35 GeV2
8
LHCb
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
4
100
150 f
m2miss > 1 GeV2
100
50
50
4
Data
B → D∗WQ
B → D∗Hc
(→ QX′)X
B → D∗∗ Q
B → D∗PQ
Combinatorial
Misidentified P
BaBar
m2miss > 1 GeV2
200
Events per 0.1 GeV
Data
B → DWQ
B → D∗WQ
B→D Q
B → D∗ Q
B → D∗∗( /W)Q
Background
c
300
–2
0
2
4
6
m2miss (GeV2)
8
0
0
10
Events per 0.075 GeV
d
1,000
500
Events per 0.3 GeV2
Events per 0.25 GeV2
200
Events per 0.3 GeV2
Events per 0.05 GeV2
400
0
BaBar
200
600
10
4,000
0.5
i
1
E ∗ (GeV)
q2 > 9.35 GeV2
1.5
2
LHCb
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
E∗P (GeV)
2
2.5
Figure 5 | Extraction of the ratios RD and R D∗ by maximum likelihood
2
and
fits. Shown are comparisons of the projections of the measured mmiss
E∗ℓ distributions (data points with statistical errors) and the fitted
distributions of signal and background contributions (coloured areas; see
keys in d and g) for the fit by the BaBar collaboration26 to the Dℓ samples
(a–c) and to the D∗ℓ samples (d–f), as well the fit by the LHCb
collaboration34 to the D∗+ℓ sample (g–i). The Dℓ samples in a–c show
sizeable contributions from B 0 → D∗+ℓ −νℓ and B 0 → D∗+τ −ντ decays,
because the low-energy pion or photon originating from a D* → Dπ orD* → Dγ decay was undetected. The BaBar data exclude q2 < 4 GeV2,
where the contributions from signal decays is very small. The E∗ℓ
distributions in c and f are signal enhanced by the restriction
2
> 1GeV2. The LHCb results are presented for two different q2
mmiss
intervals: the lowest, which is free of B 0 → D∗+τ −ντ decays (g); and the
highest, where this contribution is large (h, i). Panels a–f adapted from
ref. 26, American Physical Society; panels g–i adapted from ref. 34,
American Physical Society.
In the standard model, these B decays are mediated by a virtual charged
vector boson, a particle of spin 1, usually referred to as the W− (as indi-
cated in the diagram in Fig. 1), which couples equally to all leptons. If a
hitherto unknown virtual particle existed that interacted differently with
leptons of higher mass such as the τ, this could change the B decay rates
and their kinematics.
Among the simplest explanations for the observed rate increases for
decays involving τ− would be the existence of a new vector boson, W′−,similar to the standard model W− boson, but with a greater mass, and
with couplings of varying strengths to different leptons and quarks. This
could lead to changes in RD and R D∗ , but not in the kinematics of the
decays, which are observed to be consistent with the standard model.
However, this choice is constrained by searches for W ′− → tb decays40,41
at the LHC collider at CERN, as well as by precision measurements of
μ (ref. 42) and τ (ref. 43) decays.
Another potentially interesting candidate would be a new type of Higgs
boson, a particle of spin 0, similar to the recently discovered neutral
Higgs44,45, but electrically charged. This charged Higgs (H−) was pro-
posed in minimal extensions of the standard model46, which are part of
broader theoretical frameworks such as supersymmetry47. The H− would
mediate weak decays, similar to the W− (as indicated in Fig. 1), but couple
differently to leptons of different mass. The q2 and angular distributions
would be affected by this kind of mediator because of its different spin.
Another feasible solution might be leptoquarks48, hypothetical parti-
cles with both electric and colour (strong) charges that allow transitions
from quarks to leptons and vice versa, and offer a unified description of
three generations of quarks and leptons. Among the ten different types
of leptoquarks, six could contribute to B → D(*)τν decays49. A diagram
of a spin-0 state mediating quark-lepton transitions is shown in Fig. 7 for
the B decay modes under study.
The BaBar and Belle collaborations have studied the implications of
these hypothetical particles in the context of specific models26,32. The
measured values of RD and R D∗ do not support the simplest of the two-
Higgs doublet models (type II), however, more general Higgs models with
appropriate parameter choices can accommodate these values50–52. Some
of the leptoquark models could also explain the measured values of RD
and R D∗ (refs 53–55), evading constraints from direct searches of lep-
toquarks in ep collisions56 at HERA57,58 and pp collisions at LHC59,60.
The three-body kinematics of B → D(*)τντ decays should permit further
discrimination of new-physics scenarios based on the decay distribu-
tions of final state particles. The q2 spectrum26,32 and the momentum
0.45
0.40
BaBar (HT)Belle (HT)
LHCbBelle (ST)
Heavy Flavor
Averaging GroupStandard model
expectation
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
Figure 6 | RD and R D∗ measurements. Results from the BaBar26,
Belle32,33 and LHCb34 collaborations, showing their measured values and
1σ contours. The average calculated by the Heavy Flavor Averaging
Group39 (taking into account the statistical and systematic uncertainties
and their correlations) is compared to standard model predictions17–19.
ST and HT refer to the measurements with semileptonic and hadronic
tags, respectively.
8 J u n e 2 0 1 7 | VO L 5 4 6 | NAT U R E | 2 3 1
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.RESEARCH Review
a
−
b
B–
LQ
u¯
Q¯
−
b
b
B–, B¯ 0
ū, d̄
In recent years, several experiments have examined decay rates and
angular distributions for B+ decays involving a K(*)+ meson and a lepton
pair, B + → K (∗) +µ+µ− and B + → K (∗) +e+e− . In the framework of the
standard model these decays are very rare, since they involve b → s quark
transitions. The LHCb collaboration62 recently published a measurement
of the ratio:
RK =
Q¯
LQ
c
ū, d̄
D0,(∗), D+,(∗)
Figure 7 | Diagrams for non-standard-model decay processes.
a, B− → ℓ −νℓ , with a purely leptonic final state; b, B− → D (∗)ℓ −νℓ , involving
a charm meson (D or D*) and lepton pair and mediated by a spin-0
leptoquark (LQ).
distributions of the D(*) and electron or muon33 have been examined.
Within the uncertainties of existing measurements, the observed shapes
of these distributions are consistent with standard model predictions.
Conclusions and outlook
Although the observed enhancements of the leptonic and semileptonic
B-meson decay rates involving a τ lepton relative to the expectations
of the standard model of electroweak interactions are intriguing, their
significance is not sufficient at present to establish a violation of lepton
universality unambiguously. However, the fact that these unexpected
enhancements have been observed by three experiments operating in
very different environments deserves further attention.
At present, the measurements are limited by the size of the available
data samples and uncertainties in the reconstruction efficiencies and
background estimates. It is not inconceivable that the experiments have
underestimated these uncertainties, or missed a more conventional
explanation. Furthermore, although it is unlikely, it cannot be totally
excluded that the theoretical standard model predictions are not as firm as
assumed. The experimenters are continuing their analysis efforts, refining
their methods, enhancing the signal samples by adding additional decay
modes, improving the efficiency and selectivity of the tagging algorithms,
as well as the Monte Carlo simulations, and scrutinizing all other aspects
of the signal extraction.
In the near future, the LHCb collaboration will make several important
contributions, among them their first measurement of the B → Dτ −ντ
decay, which will also improve results for B → D∗τ −ντ . Furthermore, the
τ − → π−π +π−ντ decay mode will be included. In addition, searches for
lepton universality violation in semileptonic decays of other B mesons
and baryons are being planned. Beyond that, LHCb will continue to
record data at the highest pp collision energy available. By the end of 2017,
the accumulated data sample is expected to increase by a factor of three.
In the longer-term future, the LHCb collaboration is planning to further
enhance the data rate capability and record much larger event samples.
At KEK in Japan, the e+e− collider is undergoing a major upgrade and
is expected to enlarge the data sample by almost two orders of magnitude
over a period of about ten years. In parallel, the capabilities of the Belle
detector are also being upgraded. The operation of this new and more
powerful detector is expected to start in 2018. The much larger event
samples and the constrained BB kinematics will allow more precise meas-
urements of kinematic distributions and detailed studies of, for instance,
the τ polarization in B → D(*)τντ decays. The feasibility of such a meas-
urement was recently presented61. For B− → τ −ντ decays, which currently
have statistical and systematic uncertainties of 30% or more for individual
measurements, the substantially larger data samples are expected to lead
to major reductions in these uncertainties, allowing more accurate assess-
ments of the compatibility with the standard model predictions. Detailed
studies of the overall physics goals and precision measurements that can
be achieved by the upgraded Belle and LHCb experiments are
continuing.
B(B + → K+µ+µ−)
= 0.745 ±00..090
074 ± 0.036
B(B + → K+e+e−)
(9)
This value is 2.6 standard deviations below the standard model expecta-
tion of about 1.0. Earlier measurements by the Belle63, CDF64 and BaBar65
collaborations had significantly larger uncertainties and were fully con-
sistent with lepton universality. Some theoretical models include new
types of interactions that can explain this result: for example, leptoquarks
which can mediate this decay and result in higher rates for electrons than
muons66,67. The BaBar65, LHCb68 and Belle69 collaborations have a­ nalysed
angular distributions for the four decay modes and observed general
agreement with standard model predictions, except for local deviations,
the most significant by LHCb at the level of 3.4 standard deviations. More
data are needed to enhance the significance of these measurements and
find possible links to B decays involving τ leptons.
If the currently observed excess in the ratios RD and R D∗ is confirmed,
experimenters will use their large data samples to measure properties of
signal events and learn about the nature of the new particles and interac-
tions that contribute to these decays70,71.
In conclusion, we can expect much larger event samples from the
upgraded LHCb and Belle experiments in the not too distant future.
These data will be critical to the effort to understand whether the
­tantalizing results obtained so far are an early indication of beyond-the-
standard-model physics processes or the result of larger-than-expected
statistical or systematic deviations. A confirmation of new-physics
­contributions in these decays would shake the foundations of our under-
standing of matter and trigger an intense programme of experimental
and theoretical research.
