INSIGHT REVIEW
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007|doi:10.1038/nature06079
Beyond the standard model with the LHC
John Ellis1
Whether or not the Large Hadron Collider reveals the long-awaited Higgs particle, it is likely to lead to
discoveries that add to, or challenge, the standard model of particle physics. Data produced will be pored over
for any evidence of supersymmetric partners for the existing denizens of the particle ‘zoo’ and for the curled-
up extra dimensions demanded by string theory. There might also be clues as to why matter dominates over
antimatter in the Universe, and as to the nature of the Universe’s dark matter.
The unparalleled high energy of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC),
with its 7 TeV per beam and its enormously high collision rate that
should reach a billion collisions per second, makes it a microscope
able to explore the inner structure of matter on a scale that is an
order of magnitude smaller than previously achieved. Results at the
energies and distances explored so far led physicists to successfully
describe matter using the standard model of particle physics1–3. But this
description is incomplete, and the standard model raises, but leaves
unanswered, many fundamental questions. Explanations are needed
for the origin of particle masses and the small differences seen in the
properties of matter and antimatter, as well as to establish whether fun-
damental interactions can be unified. Moreover, the standard model
has no explanation for some of the basic puzzles of cosmology, such as
the origin of matter and the nature of the Universe’s dark matter and
dark energy. There are high hopes that the LHC will help resolve at
least some of these basic issues in cosmology and in physics beyond
the standard model4.
Theoretical calculations made using the standard model agree well with
data collected at lower-energy accelerators, such as at CERN’s Large Elec-
tron–Positron (LEP) accelerator in the 1990s and, more recently, at the
Tevatron proton–antiproton collider at Fermilab (Batavia, Illinois)5. Data
collected at LEP agreed with the standard model at the per-mille level, and
recent measurements of the masses of the intermediate vector boson W
(ref. 6) and the top quark7 agree well with standard-model predictions.
But the theoretical calculations are valid only with an ingredient that has
not yet been observed — the notorious Higgs boson. Without this miss-
ing ingredient, the calculations yield incomprehensible, infinite results8,9.
The agreement of the data with the calculations implies not only that the
Higgs boson (or something equivalent) must exist, but also suggests that
its mass should be well within the reach of the LHC5.
In this review, I discuss the likelihood of finding the Higgs boson and
what other physics beyond the standard model the accelerator might
reveal.
There are two ways to break the symmetry of the standard model. The
preferred way is to respect the symmetry of the underlying equations, in
which the massless photon and the massive W and Z bosons appear in
the same way, but look for an asymmetric solution, much as the reader
and writer are lopsided solutions of the symmetric equations of electro-
magnetism. According to this approach to the standard model, symmetry
is thought to be already broken in the lowest-energy state, the so-called
vacuum. This ‘spontaneous’ symmetry breaking is ascribed to a field that
permeates all space, taking a specific value that can be calculated from the
underlying equations, but with a random orientation in the internal ‘space’
of particles that breaks the underlying symmetry. This mechanism, which
was suggested by Peter Higgs10 and independently by Robert Brout and
François Englert11, forces some particles, such as the photon, to remain
massless, but gives masses to others in proportion to their coupling to this
vacuum field (Fig. 1).
In the same way that the electromagnetic field has a quantum particle
associated with it, the photon, this vacuum field would also have an associ-
ated quantum particle, the Higgs boson. Experiments at LEP seemed at
one time to have found a hint of its existence12. In the end, however, these
searches were unsuccessful and told us only that any Higgs boson must
weigh at least 114 GeV (ref. 13). If its mass is less than about 200 GeV,
researchers using the Tevatron may find some evidence for it before the
LHC comes into operation14.
The large experiments, ATLAS15 and CMS16, at the LHC will be looking
for the Higgs boson in several ways (Fig. 2). The Higgs boson is predicted
to be unstable and decay into other particles, such as photons, bottom
quarks, tau leptons, W or Z bosons. It may well be necessary to combine
several different decay modes to uncover a convincing signal. The LHC
experiments should be able to find the Higgs boson even if it weighs as
much as 1 TeV, and there are high expectations that it could be found
during the first couple of years of LHC operation. Its discovery would set
the seal on the success of the standard model.
Higgs or bust?
Searching for symmetry breaking
Why should the Higgs boson exist, and are there any alternatives? In
the underlying equations of the standard model, none of the elementary
particles seems to have mass. In the real world, however, only the pho-
ton and gluon, the carriers of the electromagnetic and strong nuclear
interactions, are massless. All the other elementary particles are massive,
with the W and Z bosons, intermediaries of the weak nuclear interac-
tion, and the top quark weighing as much as decent-sized nuclei. The
underlying symmetry between the different particles of the standard
model must be broken so that some may acquire masses.
With the impending confirmation or refutation of the Higgs hypothesis,
many theorists are getting cold feet. Some are beginning to support
alternative scenarios that go beyond the standard model17. One popular
suggestion is that the Higgs boson might not be an ‘elementary’ particle
in the same sense as the quarks, leptons and the photon, but instead
might be composed of simpler constituents18. This model would be
analogous to the Bardeen–Cooper–Schrieffer (BCS) theory of super-
conductivity, in which a photon acquires an effective mass by interact-
ing with ‘Cooper pairs’ of electrons. In this analogy, the W and Z bosons
would ‘eat’ tightly bound pairs of novel strongly interacting fermions
1
Theory Division, Physics Department, CERN, CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland.
297INSIGHT REVIEW
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007
is that the LHC will provide us with a clear-cut experimental answer and
end the speculation.
The hierarchy problem
Figure 1 | Picturing the Higgs field. The behaviour of physicists in a crowded
social event at a conference is an analogy for the Higgs mechanism, as
proposed by David Miller (University College London). The physicists
represent a non-trivial medium permeating space. In the upper panel, the
physicists cluster around a famous scientist who enters the room, slowing
the scientist’s progress. In much the same way, a particle passing through
the Higgs–Brout–Englert field slows down and acquires a mass. In the
lower panel, a rumour propagates. This is an excitation of the medium
— the group of physicists — itself, forming a body with a large mass; this
is analogous to the formation of a Higgs boson. Figure reproduced with
permission from CERN.
rather than an elementary Higgs field. It seems rather difficult to recon-
cile this composite alternative with the accurate low-energy data from
LEP5, but some enthusiasts are still pursuing this possibility. Alterna-
tively, it has been suggested that the Higgs boson is indeed elementary,
but is supplemented by some additional physics — for example, being
supersymmetric (discussed later).
The most radical alternative to the Higgs hypothesis exploits the sec-
ond way of breaking the standard model’s symmetry. It postulates that,
although the underlying equations are symmetric, their solution is sub-
ject to boundary conditions that break that symmetry. What boundary
would that be, given that space is apparently infinite (or at least very large
compared to the scale of particle physics)? The answer is that there might
be additional, very small dimensions of space with edges where the sym-
metry may be broken19. Such models would have no Higgs boson, and are
difficult to reconcile with the data already acquired that seem to require
a relatively light Higgs boson.
Theorists are amusing themselves discussing which would be worse:
to discover a Higgs boson with exactly the properties predicted in the
standard model or to discover that there is no Higgs boson. The former
would be a vindication of theory, but would teach us little new. The lat-
ter would upset the entire basis of the standard model. The absence of a
Higgs boson would be exciting for particle physicists, but it might not be
so funny to explain to the politicians who have funded the LHC mainly to
discover this particle. Whichever option nature chooses, the good news
298
Resolving the Higgs question will set the seal on the standard model, but,
as I mentioned at the beginning, there are plenty of reasons to expect
other physics beyond the standard model to be discovered (Fig. 3). Spe-
cifically, there are good reasons to expect other discoveries at the TeV
energy scale, within reach of experiments at the LHC. Many would con-
sider this to be the primary motivation for the leap into the unknown
that the LHC represents.
For example, it is generally thought that the elementary Higgs boson
of the standard model cannot exist in isolation. Specifically, difficulties
arise when one calculates quantum corrections to the mass of the Higgs
boson owing to the exchanges of virtual particles (see, for example, ref. 20).
Not only are these corrections infinite in the standard model, but, if the
usual procedure of controlling them by cutting the theory off at some high
energy or short distance is adopted, the net result depends on the square of
the cut-off scale. This implies that, if the standard model were embedded
in some more complete theory that kicks in at high energy — such as a
grand unified theory of the particle interactions or a quantum theory of
gravity — the mass of the Higgs boson would be sensitive to the details
of this high-energy theory. This would make it difficult to understand why
the Higgs boson has a (relatively) low mass. It would also, by extension,
make it difficult to explain why the energy scale of the weak interactions
— as reflected in the masses of the W and Z bosons — is so much smaller
than that of unification or quantum gravity.
One might be tempted simply to wish away this ‘hierarchy problem’ by
postulating that the underlying parameters of the theory are tuned finely,
so that the net value of the Higgs boson mass obtained after adding in the
quantum corrections is unnaturally small as the result of some sneaky
cancellation. But it would surely be more satisfactory either to abolish
the extreme sensitivity to the quantum corrections or to cancel them in a
systematic manner. Indeed, this has been one of the reasons for believing
that the Higgs boson is composite. If it is, the Higgs boson would have a
finite size, which would cut the pesky quantum corrections off at some
relatively low scale. In this case, the LHC might uncover a cornucopia of
new particles with masses around this cut-off scale, which should be near
1 TeV. At the very least, the interactions of the W and Z vector bosons
would be modified in an observable way.
The supersymmetric solution
An alternative way to get rid of these quantum corrections is provided by
supersymmetry21. This is an elegant theory that would pair up fermions,
such as the quarks and leptons that make up ordinary matter, with bosons,
such as the photon, gluons, W and Z that carry forces between the mat-
ter particles or even the Higgs itself (Fig. 4). Supersymmetry also seems
to be essential for making a consistent quantum theory of gravity based
on string theory (of which more later). However, these elegant argu-
ments give no clue as to what energies would be required to observe
supersymmetry in nature.
The first argument that supersymmetry might appear near the TeV
scale was provided by the hierarchy problem: in a supersymmetric theory,
the quantum corrections owing to the pairs of virtual fermions and
bosons cancel each other systematically22, and a low-mass Higgs boson
no longer seems unnatural23. The residual quantum corrections to the
mass of the Higgs boson would be small if differences in mass between
supersymmetric partner particles were less than about 1 TeV. Because
the fermions and bosons of the standard model do not pair up with
each other in a neat supersymmetric manner, this theory would require
each of the standard-model particles to be accompanied by an as-yet
unseen supersymmetric partner. It might seem profligate for there to be
all these partners, but at least the hypothesis predicts a ‘scornucopia’ of
supersymmetric particles that should weigh less than about 1 TeV and
hence could be produced by the LHC15,16..
In the wake of this hierarchy argument, at least three other reasons have
surfaced for thinking that supersymmetric particles weigh about 1 TeV.INSIGHT REVIEW
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007
a
c
1
–
bb
g
WW
t
g
b
W, Z
q
ZZ
H
t
Branching fraction
t
τ+τ–
10–1
cc–
gg
–
tt
10–2
W, Z
γγ
q–
H
10–3
50
100
Zγ
200
Higgs mass (GeV)
500
1,000
Figure 2 | The Higgs boson at the LHC. A Higgs (H) boson may be
produced by a range of interactions, two examples of which are shown
here. The first, a, is through fusion of gluons (g) from the protons in the
LHC beams, through a top (t) quark loop; and the second, b, is through
a bremsstrahlung process, in which a quark (q) and antiquark (q‒)
annihilate to create a W or Z boson, which may then radiate a Higgs.c, The Higgs itself then decays, and it is these decay products that
will be caught in a detector. The ‘branching fraction’ or probability
of decay to certain products depends on the (as-yet unknown) mass
of the Higgs particle, which is dominated by decay to a bottom–
antibottom quark pair at low mass, but by decay to pairs of W bosons
at high mass.
The first is that these particles would facilitate the unification of the strong,
weak and electromagnetic forces into a simple grand unified theory24.
Another argument is that a theory with low-energy supersymmetry would
predict that the Higgs boson weighs less than about 150 GeV (ref. 25),
which is precisely the range favoured indirectly by the present data. The
final one is that, in many models, the lightest supersymmetric particle
(LSP) is an ideal candidate for the dark matter advocated by astrophysicists
and cosmologists.
The LSP is ideal because it is stable when a suitable combination of
baryon and lepton numbers is conserved26, as happens in the minimal
supersymmetric extension of the standard model, as well as in simple
models of grand unification and neutrino masses. In this case, LSPs
would be left over as relics from early in the Big Bang, and calculations of
their abundance yield a density of dark matter in the range favoured by
astrophysics and cosmology if the LSP weighs at most a few hundred GeV,
probably putting it within reach of the LHC27.
Supersymmetry could be a bonanza for the LHC, with many types of
supersymmetric particle being discovered. In many models, the LHC
would produce pairs of gluinos (the supersymmetric partners of the
gluons) or squarks (the supersymmetric partners of the quarks) that would
subsequently decay through various intermediate supersymmetric parti-
cles. Finally, each of these pairs of particles would yield a pair of LSPs that
interact only weakly and hence carry energy away invisibly. In favourable
cases, the masses of several intermediate particles could be reconstructed
this way. It might even be possible to use these measurements to calculate
what the supersymmetric dark-matter density should be, so as to compare
the result with the astrophysical estimates28.the Planck length of around 10–33 cm. But more recently, it was realized
that at least some of these new dimensions might be much larger and
possibly have consequences observable at the LHC.
One of the possibilities offered by these speculations is that gravity is
strong when these extra dimensions appear, possibly at energies close to
1 TeV. Under this condition, according to some variants of string theory,
microscopic black holes might be produced by the LHC32. These would
be short-lived, decaying rapidly through thermal (Hawking) radiation.
Measurements of this radiation would offer a unique laboratory window
on the mysteries of quantum gravity. The microscopic black holes would
emit energetic photons, leptons, quarks and neutrinos, providing distinc-
tive experimental signatures. In particular, the neutrinos they emit would
carry away more invisible energy than LSPs would in the supersymmetric
models discussed previously33.
Although microscopic black holes would be the most dramatic sign
of large extra dimensions, they are not the only sign of such theories that
might be visible at the LHC. If the extra dimensions are curled up on a
sufficiently large scale, the ATLAS and CMS projects might be able to
see Kaluza–Klein excitations of standard-model particles, or even of the
graviton, the mediator particle of gravity. Indeed, the spectroscopy of some
extra-dimensional theories might be as rich as that of supersymmetry34.
If so, how do we tell which cornucopia the LHC is uncovering? There
are significant differences in the relationship between, for example, the
masses of the partners of quarks and leptons in supersymmetric theories
and in theories with large extra dimensions. Moreover, the spins of the
Kaluza–Klein excitations would be the same as those of their standard-
model progenitors, whereas the spins of the supersymmetric partners
Into extra dimensions?
Postulating a composite Higgs boson or supersymmetry are not the only
strategies that have been proposed for dealing with the hierarchy problem.
Another suggestion is that there are additional dimensions of space29.
Clearly, space is three-dimensional on the scales that we know so far, but
the idea that there are additional dimensions curled up so small that they
are invisible has been in the air since it was first proposed by Kaluza and
Klein over 80 years ago. This idea has gained ground in recent years with
the realization that string theory predicts the existence of extra dimen-
sions of space30.
According to string theory, elementary particles are not idealized points
of euclidean geometry, but are objects extended along one dimension
(a string) or are membranes with more dimensions31. For the quantum
theory of strings to be consistent, particles have to move in a space with
more than the usual three dimensions. Initially, it was thought that these
extra dimensions would be curled up on scales that might be as small as
Strings?
Extra dimensions?
Supersymmetry?
GUTs?
103
0
GeV
1014
Standard
model
1016
1019
LHC
Figure 3 | Physics beyond the TeV scale. The standard model has been well
tested up to around the 100-GeV mass scale. The LHC will test beyond
this, to the crucial 1,000-GeV level, the TeV scale, at which hints of new
physics, such as supersymmetry and extra dimensions, may emerge. String
theory or grand unified theories (GUTs) inhabit much higher energy scales,
approaching 1019 GeV, which is called the Planck scale.
299INSIGHT REVIEW
Half-integer
spin
Integer
spin
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007
Known particles of
the standard modelPostulated supersymmetric
partners or ‘sparticles’
ElectronSelectron
NeutrinoSneutrino
Top quarkStop
GluonGluino
PhotonPhotino
Integer
spin
Half-integer
spin
Figure 4 | Examples of supersymmetric partners. Supersymmetry is a
symmetry drawn between fermions (with half-integer spin) and bosons
(with integer spin). It postulates that, for each fermion, there exists a
bosonic partner — such as the supersymmetric electron, or ‘selectron’,
which partners the electron. Similarly, each boson is thought to have a
fermionic superpartner, which for the gluon is the ‘gluino’.
would be different. These underlying differences translate into charac-
teristic differences in the spectra of decay products in the two classes of
model and into distinctive correlations between them35.
It is amusing that, in some theories with extra dimensions, the light-
est Kaluza–Klein particle (LKP) might be stable36, rather like the LSP in
supersymmetric models. In this case, the LKP would be another candi-
date for astrophysical dark matter. Thus, there is more than one way in
which LHC physics beyond the standard model might explain the origin
of dark matter: fortunately, the tools seem to be available for distinguish-
ing between them.
and antimatter would be insufficient to generate the matter seen in the
Universe. It is possible that the deficit will be explained by new physics at
the TeV scale revealed by the LHC. For example, supersymmetry allows
many more possibilities for differences between the properties of matter
and antimatter than are possible in the standard model38; some of these
differences might explain the amount of matter in the Universe.
This provides one of the motivations for the LHCb experiment39, which
is dedicated to probing the differences between matter and antimatter,
notably looking for discrepancies with the standard model (Box 1). In
particular, LHCb has unique capabilities for probing the decays of mesons
containing both bottom and strange quarks, the constituents of the B and
K mesons probed in other experiments investigating matter–antimatter
differences. There are many other ways to explore the physics of matter
and antimatter, and the ATLAS and CMS experiments will also contribute
to them, in particular by searching for rare decays of mesons containing
bottom quarks.
If these experiments detect any new particles beyond the standard
model at the TeV scale, questions will immediately arise as to whether this
new physics distinguishes between matter and antimatter, and whether
or not this new physics explains the origin of matter in the Universe. For
example, if the Higgs boson is discovered at the LHC, are its couplings
to matter and antimatter the same? If supersymmetry is discovered at
the LHC, do supersymmetric ‘sparticles’ and ‘antisparticles’ behave in the
same way? There are many models in which matter–antimatter differences
in the Higgs or sparticle sector are responsible for the origin of the matter
in the Universe.
The matter–antimatter conundrum
Will the LHC explain the origin of conventional matter? As was first
pointed out by the Russian physicist Andrei Sakharov37, particle physics
can explain the origin of matter in the Universe in terms of small differ-
ences in the properties of matter and antimatter, such as those discovered
in the decays of K and B mesons. Present experimental data accord well
with the matter–antimatter differences allowed by the standard model.
However, by themselves, these differences in the properties of matter
Box 1 | Penguin hunting at LHCb
Why does matter dominate over antimatter
in the Universe, considering that both were
thought to be created in equal quantities
in the Big Bang? Part of the explanation is
that some interactions between particles
take place at different rates when two
fundamental symmetries of the quantum
field theory that underlie them are
simultaneously reversed. There are two
symmetries involved: charge conjugation, C;
and parity symmetry, P. Charge conjugation
turns particles into their antiparticles by
reversing internal properties such as electric
charge. By contrast, parity symmetry flips
external particle properties such as spin,
similar to looking at an interaction in a
mirror.
CP violation was first discovered
experimentally45 in decays of K mesons, which
contain a strange quark in addition to an up or
down quark. Later theoretical work showed46
that CP violation would occur naturally in
interactions mediated by the weak nuclear
force in the standard model with three quark
generations. (At the time, particles from only
two were known.) The degree of violation is,
however, insufficient to explain the Universe’s
matter–antimatter imbalance.
The subsequent discovery of the third quark
generation, formed of the bottom (b) and top
(t) quarks, vindicated the model. A plethora of
300
Into the future
According to present plans, the first full-energy collisions of the LHC will
take place in 2008, although it will take some time for the accelerator to
build up to its designed nominal collision rate. There are hopes, however,
that in its first couple of years of operation, it will already start to provide
crucial information on physics beyond the standard model, for example
by discovering the Higgs boson — or other new particles such as those
W
B0K0
bs
t
t
Gluon
s
ϕ
–s
experiments has since confirmed CP violation,
indirectly and directly, in decay channels of
B mesons (those containing bottom quarks),
where the effect is expected to be particularly
large. These experiments notably include two
specially constructed ‘B factories’, the Belle
detector at KEK in Japan, and BaBar at the
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC),
in California, which have delivered a series of
more precise values for the parameters of CP
violation since 2001.
The LHCb experiment is LHC’s dedicated
CP-violation detector. It is a 20-m-long
spectrometer with a conical detection volume
expanding in radius along the beam axis. It is
attuned to detecting the distinctive signature
of B decays — charged particles with high
transverse momenta originating from a vertex
significantly displaced from the interaction
point of the proton beams.
To maximize the probability of only a single
B interaction per beam crossing, the LHC
beams are defocused slightly to a luminosity
of around 2.5 × 1032 cm–2s–1, below the LHC’s
nominal value of 1034 cm–2s–1. The implied
collision rates and the high energy of the LHC
beams should allow CP-violation parameters
to be more tightly constrained and perhaps
also provide a glimpse of physics beyond the
standard model.
Such physics could manifest itself, in
particular, in ‘penguin’ processes such as
B0 → K0 φ (see page 270) in which the decay
of a highly energetic B meson takes place,
legitimately according to the rules of the weak
interaction, through an intermediate loop of
massive particles such as a top quark and a
W boson (see figure). Does the degree of CP
violation in such a process differ significantly
from that found, for example, in the decay
B0 → K0 J/Ψ, which does not include a penguin
loop? If so, that could be an indication of new
physics participating in the penguin loop
— such as the involvement of supersymmetric
particles.INSIGHT REVIEW
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007
predicted by supersymmetry, if they are not too heavy40. Continued run-
ning of the LHC at its nominal luminosity would enable many properties
of the Higgs boson to be verified, for example by providing measurements
of its couplings to some other particles and checking whether these are
proportional to the particles’ masses. This period should also enable the
properties of any other newly discovered particles to be checked, such as
establishing whether their spins are the same as those of their standard-
model counterparts or are different.
What might be possible using the LHC after these planned phases of
exploitation? One possibility is to add new components to the existing
ATLAS and CMS detectors that would provide new ways to study the
Higgs boson. For example, new components close to the beams several
hundred metres from the interaction points might be able to detect rare
proton–proton collisions that produce nothing except a single isolated
Higgs boson41. Another possibility is that supersymmetric or other new
particles might show up in unexpected ways. For example, in some
supersymmetric scenarios there would be a metastable charged particle
that would have quite distinctive experimental signatures42, and it might
be interesting to devise new detectors to explore this possibility.
It might also be possible to increase the LHC collision rate significantly
beyond the nominal value. This possibility would be particularly interest-
ing if, for example, the initial runs of the LHC discover new physics with
a very low production rate, perhaps because it has a high energy thresh-
old. Increasing the LHC collision rate might be possible by redesigning
the collision points using new magnet technologies; it would also require
replacing at least some of CERN’s lower-energy accelerators, such as the
low-energy linear proton accelerator and the Proton Synchrotron, so as
to feed more intense beams into the LHC43. Technical options for increas-
ing the LHC collision rate are now being evaluated, so that they can be
considered when the first experimental results from the initial LHC runs
become available, some time around 2010.
Exploitation of the LHC and the study of possible upgrade options
are among the highest priorities for European particle physics and were
decided upon at a special meeting of the CERN Council in Lisbon in July
2006 (ref. 44). Possible future accelerators were also considered, such as a
linear electron–positron collider or a neutrino factory. The priorities for
these options will surely depend on the nature and energy scale of what-
ever new physics beyond the standard model the LHC reveals, as well as on
developments in other areas such as neutrino physics. A central element in
the European strategy for particle physics is the need to review advances
in particle physics in the coming years, and in particular to review the
implications of any LHC discoveries at the end of this decade.
Particle physics stands on the brink of a new era. Research using the
LHC will make the first exploration of physics in the TeV energy range.
There are good reasons to hope that the LHC will find new physics beyond
the standard model, but no guarantees. The most one can say for now is
that the LHC has the potential to revolutionize particle physics, and that
in a few years’ time we should know what course this revolution will take.
Will there be a Higgs boson, or not? Will space reveal new properties at
small distances, such as extra dimensions or supersymmetry? Will experi-
ments at the LHC cast light on some fundamental cosmological questions,
such as the origin of matter or the nature of dark matter? Whatever the
answers to these questions might be or whatever surprises the LHC might
spring, it will surely set the agenda for the next steps in particle physics.■
