International Journal of Modern Physics A
Vol. 28 (2013) 1330016 (6 pages)
c World Scientific Publishing Company
DOI: 10.1142/S0217751X13300160
THE STORY OF QUARKS∗
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY on 05/14/13. For personal use only.
MURRAY GELL-MANN
Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501, USA
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA
Published 14 May 2013
This public lecture was presented at the National University of Singapore on the 5th
of March, 2013. It was organized by the Institute of Advanced Studies as part of the
Distinguished Public Lecture series.
Keyword: Quarks.
It’s a pleasure to be here discussing quarks with a distinguished audience from our
leading Singaporean researchers. I’ve traveled here several times and I’ve enjoyed
every visit.
The quarks are a very important discovery, as Professor Phua mentioned. But
I will not actually adhere to the scheme of describing the story. Instead of con-
centrating on the story, I propose to concentrate on the facts. I’ll try to present a
picture of how we look at the quarks today and a little bit of what we know about
them.
In elementary science classes, you learn that a great deal of matter is in the
form of atoms, with a central nucleus, and electrons going round. The nucleus is
composed of protons with electric charge +1 in suitable units and neutrons with
electric charge 0. For a long time, it was thought that protons and neutrons would
be like electrons — elementary, and not composed of anything simpler, but we know
now that that’s not true. In fact, the neutron and proton are made up of quarks.
It’s an obvious name for the fundamental constituents of strongly interacting
matter. Let’s listen to that sound, quark, just the right sound. And as to the spelling,
we got that from James Joyce’s Finnegans Wake “Three quarks for Muster Mark!”
The idea of the proton and neutron being not elementary, as we so long thought,
took awhile to catch on, but now I think it’s generally recognized that it’s correct.
It’s actually not hard to see, when you look at not just the neutron and proton
states, but at the higher energy states of these corresponding particles which are
∗ Invited talk in Singapore, 5 March 2013. Edited by Harald Fritzsch (Munich).
1330016-1Int. J. Mod. Phys. A Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY on 05/14/13. For personal use only.
M. Gell-Mann
known as baryons. So you have not only the neutrons and protons but a little bit
heavier you have the Λ particle and a little heavier than that you have the three Σ
particles and so on and so forth.
The states that lie relatively low in energy or mass, you remember the formula
E = mc2 , so we can talk about rest mass (m) or rest energy be the same, except for
the factor of c2 . The easily accessible baryons are described in terms of three flavors
of quarks — the three flavors that are light and have relatively small masses. And
then there are also three heavier flavors of quarks, which you can’t get at without a
very high energy accelerator. I’ll talk mainly about the light quarks, the ones that
we run into more often in most theory and experiments.
The three light quarks are called s, d and u — singlet, up and down. The d and
u are very light indeed and have very very low mass, and the s quark is somewhat
heavier. More recently discovered, and as I said, more difficult to access, are the
heavy quarks. Three more “flavors,” called b, t and c, or bottom, top and charm.
When we look at the whole set of six “flavors,” three of them with charge −1/3
in conventional units where the proton charge is 1, and t, c and u with electric
charge +2/3 in units of the proton charge, we have the six “flavors” altogether, the
three heavy ones and the three light ones. They may be compared to the six flavors
of lepton, including the electron, the muon — which is a heavy electron, and the
tauon — which is the still heavier electron. For each electron, there is a neutrino.
We know now that those neutrinos are distinct from one another. So there is the
three charged leptons, e, µ and τ , and three corresponding neutrinos with 0 charge.
So we have these interesting patterns of six states in each case. Six for the
leptons, six for the quarks. Why is that? A very good question for which we don’t
know the answer. While we know more about this fascinating and fundamental
subject, we hope to understand better why the patterns resemble each other.
Here I repeat that the six flavor pattern is not really understood today, but we
hope to understand it sometime in the future. And we don’t understand why the
flavor pattern is approximately the same for leptons and for quarks, but it’s very
symmetrical.
Here we see the diagram of the neutron and the proton (Fig. 1) and the set of
the excited states — the Lambda, the three Sigmas, and the two Xi particles. It
is fairly straightforward that these can be thought of as made up of three quarks.
The u and d quarks make up the neutron and proton. When we go over to the Λ
particle, one of the quarks changes to an s. Same for the Σ, when we go to the Ξ,
two quarks become an s quark.
That is perfectly reasonable. We see why these states are heavier than these,
and these are heavier than these, because they contain s quarks, which are heavier
than the u and the d. Then theory tells us that there is a sum rule for the masses.
N
The approximate sum rule, MΞ +M
= 3MΛ4+MΣ , N : neutron or proton. And it
2
works — theoretical formula compared with observation — it works very well.
Then there’s another set of states, a different pattern, starts out with the ∆
particles which have the charges — 1, 0, +1 and +2. They are made up of d and u
1330016-2The Story of Quarks
Spin ½ baryons made of three light quarks and glue
ȩିȩ଴dssussȭିȭ଴ȭା
ddsuds + dusuus
Xi
Ȧ଴
Sigma
Lambda
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY on 05/14/13. For personal use only.
uds – dus
Mass
଴ା
udduud
(neutron)(proton)
Nucleon
M Ξ + M N 3M Λ + M Σ
=
2
4
Predicted by theory & verified
–1
0
+1
Electric Charge
Fig. 1.
quarks ranging from ddd for ∆− , all the way to uuu for ∆++ . If we substitute one
s quark, we get the Σ. If we substitute two s quarks, we get the Ξ. If we substitute
three s quarks, so that we have just three s quarks altogether, then we get the Ω− .
The Ω− has some spectacular properties experimentally. It decays in a sequence,
in a cascade sequence it decays: Ω → Ξ, Ξ → Λ, Λ → proton.
The way it was proposed was the following: there was a meeting in 1958, an
international meeting on particle physics at CERN near Geneva, Switzerland. I
attended that meeting and I heard presentations about excited states of the baryon,
including one that fitted this pattern: Σ− , Σ−0 , Σ−+ . I said to myself “Gosh! If one
of this set of particles is like this, then the masses are equally spaced. This minus
this, is the same as this minus this, is the same as this minus this.” And that’s what
the speaker was saying — he was saying they just discovered an excited state with
a suitable mass for this. That meant that had to be the final one, the Ω− with the
spectacular properties had to exist, and we could predict its mass quite accurately.
So I got up and told the international meeting about that, and two young
experimentalists at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in New York State, Long
Island, came up to me and asked me to write a recommendation that they be funded
for searching for this particle, the Ω− . I seized a napkin at the CERN cafeteria
and scrawled on the napkin a request for funds for these two experimentalists, and
handed it to the director of Brookhaven, who happened to be there also. He granted
the request, they started their procedure. It took them two years and scanning 2
million feet of film to find an event that corresponded to a decay, a cascade decay
of the Ω− .
1330016-3Int. J. Mod. Phys. A Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY on 05/14/13. For personal use only.
M. Gell-Mann
Not only did they find one — they found two — the same day after waiting for
two years, representing two different decay modes of the Ω− .
The masses came out in accordance to that sum rule formula. Everything seemed
perfect. Still, we were not describing these states in terms of quarks, it would have
been so simple. We had the mathematics right, but the very simple way of stating
the mathematics would be that these things were made of three quarks. It was not,
at that time, the way we talked about it.
It took a few years, then came this date which was very important for me —
February 1, 1964. That’s the day that the discovery of the Ω− was made. It was
also the day when my letter to the journal Physics Letters B about the quarks
was printed. We can think of that as a time of transition — before quarks to after
quarks.
Here’s how these particles look in terms of quarks. Four states, with charges
ranging from −1 to +2 — ddd, ddu, duu and uuu — then there’s a strangeness
−1 standard particles, with one s quark, then there are these with two s quarks,
and finally the Ω− , which was composed of three s quarks. Looking at it in terms
of quarks makes these things very very simple, very easy to understand. It is also
very reasonable that the mass differences should also be the same, equally spaced
states in energy or mass.
Now we have to mention another property of the quark which was not under-
stood for a number of years. That is, that the quarks carry besides the flavor label,
another label which is called “color.” It has nothing to do with regular color — it’s
just part of a joke — nevertheless, we use that name “color.” Primary colors for
mixing lights can be thought of as red and blue and green. So we can think of these
quarks as being red or blue or green. It is designated by RBG. It’s just a three-
value variable RBG. Colors is just a nickname. It’s very important that the quarks
bear this additional label. So the number of states is no longer two for particle and
antiparticle: six plus six through six flavors, giving 24. Instead, we now have two
for particle and antiparticle, three, for the three colors times the six flavors, plus
one, for the leptons, and their six flavors. So we get 48 states instead of 24, when
we include the color.
Now this color variable turns out to be very very important. It’s not just a label,
it’s the analogue for the strong interaction of electric charge for the electromagnetic
interaction. The whole basis of the dynamics of quarks has to do with color. The
color variable acts like the charge. But this is a more complicated kind of charge.
Also, just as the electromagnetic interaction is mediated by photons with quantum
electromagnetism. So, here the strong force that binds the quarks together acts on
color, and is mediated by gluons, which are the quanta of the strong color force,
just the way photons are the quanta of electromagnetism.
We see that analogy now. We have gluons instead of photons. We have strong
interactions that include electromagnetism, and the gluons are the quanta of the
strong color force. That made it possible to write down a theory — a serious,
quantitative, exact proposal for a theory which we call quantum chromodynamics.
1330016-4Int. J. Mod. Phys. A Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY on 05/14/13. For personal use only.
The Story of Quarks
Again, making use of that joke about colors. “Chromo,” of course, comes from
the Greek word “color.” So, QCD is the field theory of quarks and gluons, and
it accounts very well for the strong interactions and for the strongly interactive
particles — generally accepted as the correct theory of quarks and gluons.
Here, I digress to describe some work that must take place in the future. We look
forward to a unified theory of quantum electrodynamics, the theory of the weak
force, and the theory of the strong force quantum chromodynamics, all unified
together in a single coherent theory. We don’t quite have that, but we have some
hints as to how to get it, and my colleague Harald Fritzsch among other people has
worked on this idea. When that’s achieved, there will be corrections to quantum
chromodynamics coming from the rest of this unified theory.
Beyond that, there is a still further unified theory that we all hope to see some
day, which incorporates not only the strong and weak and electromagnetic inter-
actions, but also, general relativistic Einsteinian gravitational altogether the same
unified theory. That’s a sort of holy grail for particle physicists. Everybody would
like to discover and understand that hypothetical theory that would unify all the
forces in a single description. We don’t have it, but we look forward to having it
someday.
When it comes, it will contain, of course, corrections to QCD. So QCD is not in
that sense a perfectly final theory, there will have to be some final corrections to it
from the unification. Even the minor unification including strong electromagnetic
and weak interactions — even that will produce changes in QCD. But for the
moment, the level of accuracy in which we work today, QCD is the complete theory
of the strong interaction.
Now I’m sometimes asked on occasions like this: “How did you come up with
this idea of quarks? Was that very difficult?” My answer is: “It was not difficult at
all! It was almost obvious that the neutron and proton in their excited states were
made of quarks.” You start to look at the patterns and it’s indicated very clearly
by the patterns. So that was not the difficult step. What was tricky was to get rid
of three false principles which inhibited our understanding. These are three slogans,
not all of them false, that made it difficult to utilize the quark idea.
The first one is that the neutron and proton are elementary and they are not
composed of simpler things. Everybody knew that, and there was only one problem
with it: it was false. The neutron and proton are made up of simpler objects, namely
the quarks.
The second wrong principle was that the elementary particles cannot be trapped
inside things like the neutron and proton, never to emerge singly, to be handled
singly. Not to emerge as to be handled in quarkonics industry. There is no quarkonics
industry. Well, it’s true, unfortunately, that proposition is false, also. The quarks
are confined inside color-neutral objects like the neutron and proton, not to emerge
so as to be used in industry.
The third wrong principle is that elementary particles have to have integral
electric charges in units of the proton charge: +1, 0, −1, +2 are alright, but
1330016-5Int. J. Mod. Phys. A Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY on 05/14/13. For personal use only.
M. Gell-Mann
+2/3 and −1/3 are not alright. It’s another interesting principle, and again,
false.
In fact, the quarks have fractional electric charges: +2/3 and −1/3, and the
antiquarks −2/3 and +1/3. It’s not unheard of for theory to run into this kind of
thing. It happens from time to time.
Here again I mention that there is no quarkonics industry. If the colorful parti-
cles were not confined, there probably would be a quarkonics industry. They could
probably mediate thermonuclear reaction to give thermonuclear control and ther-
monuclear energy, it would be very useful. In fact, they don’t because they are
confined.
So, here I mention another case of a false principle that impeded progress. Back
in the 1940s and 1950s, and earlier, American students of geology were taught by
their geology professors that continental drift was wrong and impossible. Many
schoolchildren have looked at the maps of the continents and see that they fit
together, like a jigsaw puzzle. These bright children asked their teachers: “Isn’t that
important? Were those continents together at one time?” The teacher, if properly
trained in American geology, said: “No, no, no. That’s a silly idea, forget it.” But
of course, it was not a silly idea. The continents were together 200 million years
ago when they began to split up into pieces. But the students kept being taught
for a long time that continental drift was wrong. Finally, in the early 1960s, the
evidence for the continental drift became so strong, and the appeal of the new
theory of continental drift — called plate tectonics — canceled out all those years
of instruction in the wrong principle.
Finally, geology teachers taught that continental drift was okay, provided it
fitted in with plate tectonics. Except, I am told, in Harvard, where they held out
for another 10 years.
In my opinion, when faced with these arbitrary prohibitions of thinking, one
should cultivate the habit of asking “Why not? Why not confine quarks? Why not
continental drift? Are you really sure that thinking along these lines is bad?” and
so on and so forth. I mention here another case of Dr. Semmelweis, in Budapest
in the 19th century, who tried to prevent the spread of puerperal fever, which
afflicted mothers and babies. Brand new babies and mothers were dying in enormous
numbers in hospitals, and Semmelweis suggested that if the health workers, doctors
and midwives wash their hands thoroughly, there wouldn’t be a problem. Well, they
considered this false and insulting, and nothing was done about it for a number of
years. Many mothers and babies died during those years unnecessarily.
Finally, Dr. Lister came along in England and washed everything in carbolic
acid, and became Lord Lister, and puerperal fever was wiped out. But it took a
while.
So we have to be very careful when faced with these negative proclamations to
say “why not?”, and make sure that there really is a case against the condemned
idea.
In case there’s time, I hope you won’t be afraid to ask questions. Thank you.
1330016-6
