INTRODUCTION
The disparity between the time symmetry of the fundamental laws of physics and the
time asymmetries of the observed universe has been a subject of fascination for physicists
since the late 19th century.1 The following general time asymmetries are observed in this
universe:
• The thermodynamic arrow of time — the fact that approximately isolated systems are
now almost all evolving towards equilibrium in the same direction of time.
• The psychological arrow of time — we remember the past, we predict the future.
• The arrow of time of retarded electromagnetic radiation.
• The arrow of time supplied by the CP non-invariance of the weak interactions and
the CP T invariance of field theory.
• The arrow of time of the approximately uniform expansion of the universe.
• The arrow of time supplied by the growth of inhomogeneity in the expanding universe.
All of these time asymmetries could arise from time-symmetric dynamical laws solved
with time-asymmetric boundary conditions. The thermodynamic arrow of time, for exam-
ple, is implied by an initial condition in which the progenitors of today’s approximately
isolated systems were all far from equilibrium at an initial time. The CP arrow of time
could arise as a spontaneously broken symmetry of the Hamiltonian. The approximate uni-
form expansion of the universe and the growth of inhomogeneity follow from an initial “big
bang” of sufficient spatial homogeneity and isotropy, given the attractive nature of gravity.
Characteristically such arrows of time can be reversed temporarily, locally, in isolated sub-
systems, although typically at an expense so great that the experiment can be carried out
only in our imaginations. If we could, in the classical example of Loschmidt [4], reverse the
momenta of all particles and fields of an isolated subsystem, it would “run backwards” with
thermodynamic and electromagnetic arrows of time reversed.
Quantum cosmology is that part of physics concerned with the theory of the boundary
conditions of our universe. It is, therefore, the natural and most general context in which
to investigate the origin of observed time asymmetries. In the context of contemporary
quantum cosmology, several such investigations have been carried out [2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11],
starting with those of Penrose [2] on classical time-asymmetric initial and final conditions
and those of Page [5] and Hawking [6] on the emergence of the thermodynamic arrow of
time from the “no-boundary” theory of the initial condition of the universe. It is not our
purpose to review these results or the status of our understanding of the time asymmetries
mentioned above. Rather, we shall discuss in this essay, from the perspective of quantum
cosmology, a time asymmetry not specifically mentioned above. That is the arrow of time
of familiar quantum mechanics.
Conventional formulations of quantum mechanics incorporate a fundamental distinction
between the future and the past, as we shall review in Section II. This quantum-mechanical
1
For clear reviews, see [1, 2, 3].
2arrow of time has, in a way, a distinct status in the theory from the time asymmetries
discussed above. It does not arise, as they do, from a time-asymmetric choice of boundary
conditions for time-neutral dynamical laws. Rather, it can be regarded as a time asymmetry
of the laws themselves. However, the quantum mechanics of cosmology does not have to be
formulated in this time-asymmetric way. In Section III, extending discussions of Aharonov,
Bergman, and Lebovitz [12] and of Griffiths [13], we consider a generalized quantum me-
chanics for cosmology that utilizes both initial and final conditions to give a time-neutral,
two-boundary formulation that does not necessarily have an arrow of time [14]. In such a
formulation all time asymmetries arise from properties of the initial and final conditions, in
particular differences between them, or, at particular epochs, from nearness to the begin-
ning or end. A theory of both initial and final conditions would be the objective of quantum
cosmology.
In the context of a time-neutral formulation, the usual quantum mechanics results from
utilizing a special initial condition, together with what amounts to a final condition repre-
senting complete indifference with respect to the future states, thus yielding the quantum-
mechanical arrow of time, which is sufficient to explain the observed time asymmetries of
this universe. However, a time-neutral formulation of quantum mechanics allows us to inves-
tigate to what extent the familiar final condition of indifference with respect to future states
is mandated by our observations. In particular, it allows us to investigate whether quantum
cosmologies with less blatantly asymmetric initial and final conditions might also be consis-
tent with the observed general time asymmetries. As a step in this direction we discuss a
quantum cosmology that would be, in a sense, the opposite extreme — a cosmology with a
time-symmetric pair of initial and final conditions leading to a universe that is statistically
symmetric about a moment of time. Such boundary conditions imply deviations from the
thermodynamic arrow of time and the arrow of time supplied by the CP non-invariance of
the weak interactions. We investigate such deviations to see if they are inconsistent with
observations. The classical statistical models reviewed in Section IV and the models of CP
symmetry breaking discussed in Section V suggest that the predicted deviations may be
insufficient to exclude time-symmetric boundary conditions if the interval between initial
and final conditions is much longer than our distance in time from the initial condition.
Next, we review and augment the arguments of Davies and Twamley that electromagnetic
radiation may supply a probe of the final condition that is sufficiently accurate to rule out
time-symmetric boundary conditions.
We should emphasize that we are not advocating a time-symmetric cosmology but only
using it as a foil to test the extent to which observation now requires the usual asymmetric
boundary conditions and to search for more refined experimental tests. The important
result of this paper is a quantum framework for examining cosmologies with less asymmetric
boundary conditions than the usual ones, so that the quantum-mechanical arrow of time
(with its consequent time asymmetries) can be treated, or derived, as one possibility out of
many, to be confronted with observation, rather than as an axiom of theory.
Relations between the initial and final conditions of a quantum-mechanical universe suf-
ficient for both CP T -symmetric cosmologies and time-symmetric cosmologies are discussed
in Section V. Ways in which the T -violation exhibited by the weak interaction could arise
in such universes are described there as well. In Section VI we discuss the limitations on
time-symmetric quantum boundary conditions following from the requirements of decoher-
ence and classicality. Specifically, we show that for a set of alternative histories to have
3the negligible interference between its individual members that is necessary for them to
be assigned probabilities at all, there must be some impurity in the initial or final density
matrices or both, except in the highly unorthodox case in which there are only one or two
coarse-grained histories with non-negligible probability.
We should make clear that our discussion of time-symmetric cosmologies, based on spec-
ulative generalizations of quantum mechanics and causality, with separate initial and final
density matrices that are related by time symmetry, is essentially different from the conjec-
ture that has sometimes been made that ordinary causal quantum or classical mechanics,
with just a single boundary condition or a single prescribed wave function, CP T -invariant
about some time in the distant future, might lead to a T -symmetric or CP T -symmetric cos-
mology with a contracting phase in which the arrows of time are reversed [6, 15, 16, 17, 18].
It is the latter notion, by the way, that Hawking refers to as his “greatest mistake” [19]. We
shall return to this topic in Section V.
II.
THE ARROW OF TIME IN QUANTUM MECHANICS
As usually formulated, the laws of quantum mechanics are not time-neutral but incorpo-
rate an arrow of time. This can be seen clearly from the expression for the probabilities of
histories consisting of alternatives at definite moments of time t1 < t2 < · · · < tn . Let {αk }
be an exhaustive set of alternatives at time tk represented by {Pαkk (tk )}, a set of projection
operators in the Heisenberg picture. For example, the alternatives {αk } might be defined by
an exhaustive set of ranges for the center-of-mass position of a massive body. A particular
history corresponds to a specific sequence of alternatives (α1 , · · · , αn ). The probability for
a particular history in the exhaustive set of histories is
h
i
p (αn , · · · , α1 ) = T r Pαnn (tn ) · · · Pα11 (t1 )ρPα11 (t1 ) · · · Pαnn (tn ) ,
(2.1)
where ρ is the density matrix describing the initial state of the system and the projection
operators are time-ordered from the density matrix to the trace.2
The expression for the probabilities (2.1) is not time-neutral. This is not because of
the time ordering of the projection operators. Field theory is invariant under CP T and
the ordering of the operators could be reversed by a CP T transformation of the projection
operators and density matrix, leaving the probabilities unchanged. (See e.g. [20] or [14]).
Either time ordering may therefore be used; it is by convention that we usually use the one
with the condition represented by the density matrix ρ in the past.
Rather, (2.1) is not time-neutral because there is a density matrix on one end of the chain
of projections representing a history while at the other end there is the trace [12, 13, 14].
Whatever conventions are used for time ordering, there is thus an asymmetry between future
and past exhibited in the formula for probabilities (2.1). That asymmetry is the arrow of
time in quantum mechanics.
2
This compact expression of the probabilities of ordinary quantum mechanics has been noted by many
authors. For more details of this and other aspects of the quantum mechanical formalism we shall employ
the reader is referred to [20] and [14] where references to earlier literature may be found.
4The asymmetry between past and future exhibited by quantum mechanics implies the
familiar notion of causality. From an effective density matrix describing the present alone it
is possible to predict the probabilities for the future. More precisely, given that alternatives
α1 , · · · , αk have “happened” at times t1 < · · · < tk before time t, the conditional probability
for alternatives αk+1 , · · · , αn to occur in the future at times tk+1 , · · · , tn may be determined
from an effective density matrix ρeff (t) at time t. Specifically, the conditional probabilities
for future prediction are
p(αn , · · · , αk+1 |αk , · · · , α1 ) =
p(αn , · · · , α1 )
.
p(αk , · · · , α1 )
(2.2)
These can be expressed as
h
i
k+1
n
p(αn , · · · , αk+1|αk , · · · , α1 ) = T r Pαnn (tn ) · · · Pαk+1
(t
)ρ
(t
)P
(t
)
·
·
·
P
(t
)
,
k+1 eff k
αk+1 1
αn n
k+1
(2.3)
where the effective density matrix ρeff is
Pαkk (tk ) · · · Pα11 (t1 )ρPα11 (t1 ) · · · Pαkk (tk )

.
ρeff (tk ) =
T r Pαkk (tk ) · · · Pα11 (t1 )ρPα11 (t1 ) · · · Pαkk (tk )
(2.4)
The density matrix ρeff (tk ) can be said to define the effective state of the universe at time
tk , given the history (α1 , · · · , αk ).
What is the physical origin of the time asymmetry in the basic laws of quantum mechanics
and what is its connection with the other observed time asymmetries of our universe? The
rest of this Section addresses that question.
The reader may be most familiar with the expression for probabilities (2.1) in the context
of the approximate “Copenhagen” quantum mechanics of measured subsystems. In that
case operators, the density matrix, etc. all refer to the Hilbert space of the subsystem. The
sets of projection operators {Pαkk (tk )} describe alternative outcomes of measurements of the
subsystem.
Formula (2.1) for the probabilities of a sequence of measured outcomes is then a unified
expression of the “two forms of evolution” usually discussed in the quantum mechanics
of subsystems — unitary evolution in between measurements and the “reduction of the
state vector” on measurement. The time asymmetry of (2.1) does not arise from the unitary
evolution of the projection operators representing the measured quantities in the Heisenberg
picture; that is time-reversible. Rather, it can be said to arise from the successive reductions
represented by the projections in (2.4) that occur on measurement. The common explanation
for the origin of the arrow of time in the quantum mechanics of measured subsystems is that
measurement is an irreversible process and that quantum mechanics inherits its arrow of
time from the arrow of time of thermodynamics.3 If that is the case, then the origin of the
3
This connection between the thermodynamic arrow of time and the quantum-mechanical arrow of time can
be ambiguous. Suppose, for example, a measuring apparatus is constructed in which the local approach
to equilibrium is in the opposite direction of time from that generally prevailing in the larger universe.
If that apparatus interacts with a subsystem (perhaps previously measured by other apparatus adhering
to the general thermodynamic arrow of time) should the operators representing those measurements be
5quantum-mechanical arrow of time must ultimately be cosmological, for the straightforward
explanation of the thermodynamic arrow of time is a special initial condition for the universe
implying that its constituents were far from equilibrium across a spacelike surface. Let us,
therefore, investigate more fundamentally the quantum-mechanical arrow of time, not in an
approximate quantum mechanics of measured subsystems, but in the quantum mechanics
of a closed system — most realistically and generally the universe as a whole.
The formula (2.1) for the probabilities of histories also holds in the quantum mechanics of
a closed system such as the universe as a whole, at least in an approximation in which gross
fluctuations in the geometry of spacetime are neglected. The sets of projection operators
describe alternatives for the whole system, say the universe, and the density matrix can be
thought of as describing its initial condition.4 Not every set of histories that may be described
can be assigned probabilities according to eqreftwoone. In the quantum mechanics of closed
systems consistent probabilities given by (2.1) are predicted only for those sets of histories
for which there is negligible interference between the individual members of the set [14] as
a consequence of the particular initial ρ. Such sets of histories are said to “decohere”. We
shall defer until Section V a discussion of the precise measure of the coherence between
histories and the implications of decoherence for time symmetry in quantum mechanics. We
concentrate now on the theoretical status of the arrow of time exhibited by (2.1) in the
quantum mechanics of cosmology.
An arrow of time built into a basic quantum mechanics of cosmology may not (as in
the approximate “Copenhagen” quantum mechanics of measured subsystems) be attributed
to the thermodynamic arrow of an external measuring apparatus or larger universe. In
general, these external objects are not there. An arrow of time in the quantum mechanics
of cosmology would be a fundamental time asymmetry in the basic laws of physics. Indeed,
given that, as we mentioned in the Introduction, the other observed time asymmetries
could all arise from time-symmetric dynamical laws solved with time-asymmetric boundary
conditions, a fundamental arrow of time in the laws of quantum mechanics could be the only
fundamental source of time asymmetry in all of physics.
There is no inconsistency between known data and a fundamental arrow of time in quan-
tum mechanics. General time asymmetries are exhibited by our universe and there is no
evidence suggesting any violation of causality. The observed time asymmetries such as the
thermodynamic arrow of time, the arrow of retarded electromagnetic radiation, the absence
of white holes, etc. could all be seen to follow from a fundamental quantum-mechanical dis-
tinction between the past and future. That is, they could all be seen to arise from a special
initial ρ in a quantum-mechanical framework based on (2.1).
But might it not be instructive to generalize quantum mechanics so that it does not so
blatantly distinguish past from future? One could then investigate a more general class
of quantum cosmologies and identify those that are compatible with the observed time
asymmetries. Even if it is highly unlikely that ordinary quantum mechanics needs to be
ordered according to the thermodynamic arrow of the apparatus or of the larger universe with respect to
which it is running backwards? Such puzzles are resolvable in the more general quantum mechanics of
closed systems to be discussed below, where “measurements”, the “thermodynamic arrow of time”, and
any connection between the two are all approximate notions holding in only special situations.
4
For a more detailed exposition of this quantum mechanics of cosmology, the reader is referred to our
previous work [14, 20, 21], where references to the earlier literature may also be found.
6replaced by such a generalization, the generalization can still provide an instructive way of
viewing the origin of time asymmetry in the universe and provide a framework for discussing
tests of the usual assumptions. We shall discuss in the next section a quantum mechanics
that employs two boundary conditions, one for the past and one for the future, to give a
time-neutral formulation. Each condition is represented by a density matrix and the usual
theory is recovered when the future density matrix is proportional to the unit matrix while
the one for the past is much more special.
III.
A TIME-NEUTRAL FORMULATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS FOR
COSMOLOGY
Nearly thirty years ago, Aharonov, Bergmann, and Lebovitz [12] showed how to cast
the quantum mechanics of measured subsystems into time-neutral form by considering final
conditions as well as initial ones. The same type of framework for the quantum mechanics
of closed systems has been discussed by Griffiths [13] and ourselves [14]. In this formulation
the probabilities for the individual members of a set of alternative histories is given by
i
h
(3.1a)
p(αn , · · · , α1 ) = NT r ρf Pαnn (tn ) · · · Pα11 (t1 ) ρi Pα11 (t1 ) · · · Pαnn (tn ) ,
where
N −1 = T r (ρf ρi ) .
(3.1b)
Here, ρi and ρf are Hermitian, positive operators that we may conventionally call Heisenberg
operators representing initial and final conditions for the universe respectively. They need
not be normalized as density matrices with T r(ρ) = 1 because (3.1) is invariant under
changes of normalization.
The expression (3.1) for the probabilities of histories is time-neutral. There is a density
matrix at both ends of each history. Initial and final conditions may be interchanged by
making use of the cyclic property of the trace. Therefore, the quantum mechanics of closed
systems based on (3.1) need not have a fundamental arrow of time.
Different quantum-mechanical theories of cosmology are specified by different choices for
the initial and final conditions ρi and ρf . For those cases with ρf ∝ I, where I is the unit
matrix, this formulation reduces to that discussed in the previous Section because then (3.1)
coincides with (2.1).
Of course, the condition for decoherence must also be extended to incorporate initial and
final conditions. That extension, however, is straightforward [13, 14] and will be reviewed
briefly in Section V. The result is a generalized quantum mechanics in the sense of Refs. [14]
and [21].
Lost in this generalization is a built-in notion of causality in quantum mechanics. Lost
also, when ρf is not proportional to I, is any notion of a unitarily evolving “state of the
system at a moment of time”. There is generally no effective density matrix like ρeff (t)
in (2.4) from which alone probabilities for either the future or past could be computed.
What is gained is a quantum mechanics without a fundamental arrow of time in which
all time asymmetries may arise in particular cosmologies because of differences between ρi
and ρf or at particular epochs from their being near to the beginning or the end. That
7generalized quantum mechanics embraces a richer variety of possible universes, allowing for
the possibility of violations of causality and advanced as well as retarded effects. These,
therefore, become testable features of the universe rather than axioms of the fundamental
quantum framework.
From the perspective of this generalized quantum mechanics the task of quantum cosmol-
ogy is to find a theory of both the initial and final conditions that is theoretically compelling
and fits our existing data as well as possible. Certainly a final condition of indifference,
ρf ∝ I, and a special initial condition, ρi , seem to fit our data well, and there is no known
reason for modifying them. But how accurately is ρf ∝ I mandated by the data? What
would be the observable consequences of a completely time-symmetric boundary condition
that is, in a sense, the opposite extreme?
Our ability to detect the presence of a final condition differing from ρf ∝ I depends on
our experimental access to systems whose behavior today predicted with ρf 6∝ I would be
measurably different from the predictions of that behavior with ρf ∝ I. Loosely speaking, it
depends on our finding physical systems which can “see” the final condition of the universe
today. In the following we examine several candidates for such systems, beginning with
simple classical analyses in Section IV and proceeding to more quantum-mechanical ones in
Section V.
IV.
A.
CLASSICAL TWO-TIME BOUNDARY PROBLEMS
A Simple Statistical Model
The simplest explanation of the observed thermodynamic arrow of time is the asymmetry
between a special, low-entropy,5 initial condition and a maximal-entropy final condition
describable as indifference with respect to final state (or as no condition at all!). Studying
deviations of the entropy increase predicted by statistical mechanics with these boundary
conditions from that predicted with time-symmetric boundary conditions is a natural way
to try to discriminate between the two. Such studies were carried out in classical statistical
models by by Cocke [22], Schulman [23], Wheeler [24], and others in the late ’60s and early
’70s. Schulman, in particular, has written extensively on these problems both in classical
and quantum mechanics [25]. We briefly review such statistical models here.
Relaxation to equilibrium is a time-symmetric process in a universe with an underlying
dynamics that is time reversal invariant. Without boundary conditions, a system out of
equilibrium is just as likely to have evolved from a state of higher entropy as it is to evolve
to a state of higher entropy. The characteristic relaxation time for a system to evolve to
equilibrium depends on the size of the system and the strength of the interactions that
equilibrate it. Other factors being equal, the larger the system the longer the relaxation
time.
There is no simpler instructive model to illustrate the approach to equilibrium than the
Ehrenfest urn model [26]. For this reason, it and related models have been much studied
in connection with statistical two-time boundary problems [22, 23]. The model consists of
5
For quantitative estimates of how low the initial entropy is, see [2].
8two boxes and a numbered set of n balls that are distributed between them. The system
evolves in time according to the following dynamical rule: At each time step a random
number between 1 and n is produced, and the ball with that number is moved from the box
containing it to the other box. This dynamical rule is time-symmetric.
The fine-grained description of this system specifies which ball is in which box (a “mi-
crostate”). An interesting coarse-grained description involves following just the total number
of balls in each box ( a “macrostate”) irrespective of which balls are in which box. Let us
use this coarse graining to consider an initial condition in which all the balls are in one box
and follow the approach to equilibrium as a function of the number of time steps, with no
further conditions. Figure 1 shows a numerical calculation of how the entropy averaged over
many realizations of this evolution grows with time to approach its maximum, equilibrium
value. The relaxation time, obtained either analytically or numerically, is approximately
the total number of balls, trelax ∼ n. If there are no further constraints, the system tends to
relax to equilibrium and remain there.
Consider evolution in the Ehrenfest urn model when a final condition identical to the
initial one is imposed at a later time T . Specifically, construct an ensemble of evolutions
consistent with these boundary conditions by evolving forward from an initial condition
where all the balls are in one box but accepting only those evolutions where all the balls are
back in this box at time T . Figure 1 shows the results of two such calculations, one for a
system with a small number of balls (where the relaxation time is significantly smaller than
T ) and the other for a system with a larger number of balls (where it is significantly larger
than T .)
For both systems the time-symmetric boundary conditions imply a behavior of the average
entropy that is time-symmetric about the midpoint, T /2. For the system with a relaxation
time short compared to the time at which the final condition is imposed, the initial approach
to equilibrium is nearly indistinguishable from that in the case with no final condition. That
is because, in equilibrium, the system’s coarse-grained dynamics is essentially independent of
its initial or final condition. It, in effect, “forgets” both from whence it started and whither
it is going.
By contrast, if the relaxation time is comparable to or greater than the time interval
between initial and final condition, then there will be significant deviations from the uncon-
strained approach to equilibrium. Such systems typically do not reach equilibrium before
the effect of the final condition forces their entropy to decrease.
The evolution of the entropy in the presence of time-symmetric initial and final conditions
must itself be time-symmetric when averaged over many evolutions, as the simulations in
Figure 1 show. However, in a statistical theory with time-symmetric boundary conditions
the individual histories need not be time-symmetric. Figure 2 shows an example of a single
history from an urn model calculation for which the average behavior of the entropy is shown
in Figure 1. The ensemble of histories is time-symmetric by construction; the individual
histories need not be. Since, by definition, we experience only one history of the universe,
this leaves open the possibility that the time-asymmetries that we see could be the result of
a statistical fluctuation in a universe with time-symmetric boundary conditions. In quantum
cosmology, we would not count such a theory of the initial and final conditions as successful if
the fluctuations required were very improbable. However, in some examples the magnitude of
the fluctuation need not be so very large. For instance, consider a classical statistical theory
in which the boundary conditions allow an ensemble of classical histories each one of which
9Figure 1: Simulation of the approach to equilibrium in the Ehrenfest urn model. The entropy
of a coarse-grained state in which only the total number of balls in each box is followed is the
logarithm number of different ways of distributing the balls between the boxes consistent with
a given total number in each. This figure shows this entropy averaged over a large number of
different evolutions of the system for several situations. These simulations were carried out by the
authors but are no different in spirit from those discussed by Cocke [22].
The left figure shows the evolution of a system of four balls. In each case the system starts with
all balls in one box — a configuration of zero entropy as far from equilibrium as it is possible to
get. The ×’s show how the average entropy of 12,556 cases approaches equilibrium when there are
no further constraints. The entropy approaches its equilibrium value in a relaxation time given
approximately by its size, trelax ∼ 4, and remains there. The curve of +’s shows the evolution when
a time symmetric final condition is imposed at T = 12 that all balls have returned to the one box
from whence they started at t = 0. A total of 100,000 evolutions were tried.
The average entropy of the 12,556 cases that met the final condition is shown. It is time symmetric
about the midpoint, T /2 = 6. The initial approach to equilibrium is virtually indistinguishable
from the approach without a final condition because trelax ∼ 4 is significantly less than the time
T = 12 at which the final condition is imposed. Only within one relaxation time of the final
condition is the deviation of the evolution from the unconstrained case apparent.
The right figure shows the same two cases for a larger system of twenty balls. The unconstrained
approach to equilibrium shown by the ×’s was calculated from the average of 1010 evolutions
and exhibits a relaxation time, trelax ∼ 20. The average entropy when time-symmetric boundary
conditions are imposed at T = 12 is shown in the curve of +’s. 10,000,000 evolutions were tried
of which 1010 met the time-symmetric final condition. (This demonstrates vividly that it is very
improbable for the entropy of even a modest size system to fluctuate far from equilibrium as
measured by the CP U time needed to find such fluctuations.)
The deviation from the unconstrained approach to equilibrium caused by the imposition of a time-
symmetric final condition is significant from an early time of about t = 3 as the differences between
the +’s and the ×’s show. These models suggest that to detect the effects of a time symmetric
final condition for the universe we must have access to systems for which the relaxation time is at
least comparable to the time difference between initial and final conditions.
displays an arrow of time and also, with equal probability, the time-reversed of that history
displaying the opposite arrow of time. The boundary conditions and the resulting ensemble
are time-symmetric, but predict an observed time-asymmetry with probability one. Of
course, such a theory might be indistinguishable from one that posited boundary conditions
10allowing just one arrow of time. However, other theoretical considerations may make it
reasonable to consider such proposals, for example, the “no boundary” initial condition
which is believed to have this character [5]. In the subsequent discussion of time-symmetric
cosmological boundary conditions we shall assume that they predict with high probability
some observable differences from the usual special initial conditions and final condition of
indifference and investigate what these are.
B.
Classical Dynamical Systems with Two-Time Statistical Boundary Conditions
The analysis of such simple classical statistical models with two-time boundary condi-
tions suggests the behavior of a classical cosmology with time-symmetric initial and final
conditions. A classical dynamical system is described by a phase space and a Hamiltonian,
H. We write z = (q, p) for a set of canonical phase-space coördinates. The histories of the
classical dynamical system are the phase-space curves z(t) that satisfy Hamilton’s equations
of motion.
A statistical classical dynamical system is described by a distribution function on phase
space ρcl (z) that gives the probability of finding it in a phase-space volume. For analogy
with quantum mechanics it is simplest to use a “Heisenberg picture” description in which the
distribution function does not depend explicitly on time but time-dependent coördinates on
phase space are used to describe the dynamics. That is, if z0 is a set of canonical coördinates
at time t = 0, a set zt appropriate to time t may be defined by zt = z0 (t) where z0 (t) is
the classical evolution of z0 generated in a time t by the Hamiltonian H. The statistical
system at time t is then distributed according to the function ρcl expressed in terms of the
coördinates zt , viz. ρcl (zt ). The distributions ρcl (zt ) and ρcl (zt′ ) will therefore typically have
different functional forms.
An ensemble of histories distributed according to the probabilities of a statistical classical
dynamical system with boundary conditions at two times ti and tf might be constructed as
follows: Evolve a large number of systems distributed according to the initial distribution
function ρcl
i (zi ) forward from time ti to time tf . If a particular system arrives at time tf in the
phase space volume ∆v centered about point zf , select it for inclusion in the ensemble with
cl
probability ρcl
f (zf )∆v where ρf is the distribution function representing the final boundary
cl
cl
condition. Thus, if ρi and ρf are referred to a common set of phase-space coördinates, say
zt , the time-symmetric ensemble of systems will be distributed according to the function
cl
ρ̄cl (zt ) = Nρcl
f (zt )ρi (zt ) ,
where
N
−1
=
Z
cl
dzt ρcl
f (zt )ρi (zt ) .
(4.1a)
(4.1b)
Referred to the initial time, (4.1) has a simple interpretation: Since classical evolution is
unique and deterministic the selection at the final time could equally well be carried out at
cl
the initial time with ρcl
f evolved back to the initial time. The distribution ρ̄ is the result.
cl
We now discuss the relation between ρcl
i and ρf that is necessary for the probabilities
of this classical cosmology to be symmetric about a moment of time. Take this time to be
t = 0 and introduce the operation, T , of time-reversal about it.
T ρcl (q0 , p0 ) ≡ ρcl (q0 , −p0 ) .
11
(4.2)If we assume that the Hamiltonian is itself time-reversal invariant
H(q0 , p0 , t) = H(q0 , −p0 , −t) ,(4.3)
T ρcl (qt , pt ) = ρcl (q−t , −p−t ) .(4.4)
this implies
The distribution function (4.1) may then be conveniently rewritten
cl
ρ̄cl (qt , pt ) = Nρcl
i (qt , pt )T ρf (q−t , −p−t ) .
(4.5)
cl
cl
A relation between ρcl
i and ρf sufficient to imply the time-symmetry of the distribution ρ̄
is now evident, namely
−1 cl
ρcl
ρi (qt , pt ) .
(4.6)
f (qt , pt ) = T
The final condition is just the time-reversed version of the initial one.
The imposition of time-symmetric statistical boundary conditions on a classical cosmology
means in particular that the entropy must behave time-symmetrically if it is computed
utilizing a coarse graining that is itself time-symmetric. The entropy of the final distribution
must be the same as the initial one. The thermodynamic arrow of time will run backwards
on one side of the moment of time symmetry as compared to the other side. This does not
mean, of course, that the histories of the ensemble need be individually time-symmetric,
as the example in Figure 2 shows. In particular, subsystems with relaxation times long
compared to the interval between initial and final conditions might have non-negligible
probabilities for fluctuations from exactly time-symmetric behavior. There would appear to
be no principle, for example, forbidding us to live on into the recontracting phase of the
universe and see it as recontracting. It is just that as time progressed events judged to be
unexpected on the basis of just an initial condition would happen with increasing frequency.
It is by the frequency of such unexpected events that we could detect the existence of a final
condition.
Could we infer the existence of a time-symmetric final condition for the universe from
the deviations that it would imply for the approach to equilibrium that would be expected
were there no such final condition? The statistical models reviewed in above suggest that to
do so we would need to study systems with relaxation times comparable to or longer than
the lifetime of the universe between the “big bang” and the “big crunch”. If the lifetime of
the universe is comparable to the present age of the universe from the “big bang”, then we
certainly know such systems. Systems of stars such as galaxies and clusters provide ready
examples. Any single star, with the ambient radiation, provides another as long as the star’s
temperature is above that of the cosmic background radiation. Black holes with lifetime to
decay by the Hawking radiation longer than the Hubble time are further examples. Indeed,
from the point of view of global cosmological geometry, the singularities contained within
black holes can be considered to be parts of the final singularity of the universe, where a final
condition would naturally be imposed [27]. The singularities of detectable black holes may
be the parts of this final singularity closest to us. On smaller scales, samples of radioactive
material with very long half-lives may be other such examples and Wheeler [24] has discussed
experiments utilizing them to search for a time-symmetric final condition. We may hope,
as mentioned above, that the evolving collective complex adaptive system of which we are
a part could be such a long-lasting phenomenon!
12Fig 2. An individual evolution in the urn model with time-symmetric initial and final conditions.
The history of the entropy averaged over many evolutions must clearly be time-symmetric in a
statistical theory with time-symmetric initial and final conditions as Figure 1 shows. However, the
individual evolutions need not be separately time-symmetric. This figure shows the entropy for the
case of twenty balls in the first evolution among the 10,000,000 described in Figure 1 that met the
time-symmetric final condition. It is not time-symmetric. For systems such as this with relaxation
time, trelax , larger than the time between initial and final conditions, significant deviations from
exact time symmetry may be expected.
However, if the lifetime of the universe is much longer than the present age from the “big
bang”, then it might be much more difficult to find systems that remain out of equilibrium
long enough for their initial approach to equilibrium to be significantly affected by a time-
symmetric final condition. That could be the case with the Ω-near-one universe that would
result from a rapid initial inflation. If its lifetime were long enough, we might never be able
to detect the existence of a time-symmetric final condition for the universe.
The lifetime of our classical universe obeying the Einstein equation is, of course, in
principle determinable from present observations (for example, of the Hubble constant, mean
mass density, and deceleration parameter). Unfortunately we do not have enough data
to distinguish observationally between a lifetime of about twenty-five billion years and an
infinite lifetime. Very long lifetimes are not only consistent with observations, but also, as
we now describe, are suggested theoretically by quantum cosmology as a consequence of
inflation.
The quasiclassical cosmological evolution that we observe should be, on a more fundamen-
tal level, a likely prediction of a quantum theory of the universe and its boundary conditions.
We shall discuss time symmetry in the context of quantum cosmology in later sections, but
for the present discussion we note that, in quantum cosmology, the probabilities for differ-
ent lifetimes of the universe are predictable from a theory of its initial and final conditions.
That is because in a quantum theory that includes gravitation the geometry of spacetime,
including such features as the time between the “big bang” and a “big crunch”, if any, is
quantum-probabilistic.
13A quantum state that predicts quasiclassical behavior does not typically predict a unique
classical history but rather an ensemble of possible classical histories with different prob-
abilities. This is familiar from wave functions of WKB form, which do not predict single
classical trajectories but only the classical connection between momentum and classical ac-
tion. Similarly, in the quantum mechanics of closed cosmologies, we expect a theory of
quantum boundary conditions to determine an ensemble of different classical cosmological
geometries with different probabilities.6 The geometries in the ensemble will have different
times between the “big bang” and the “big crunch” because in quantum gravity that time is
a dynamical variable and not a matter of our choice. In this way, the probability distribution
of lifetimes of the universe becomes predictable in quantum cosmology.
Cosmological theories that predict inflation lead to very large expected values for the
lifetime of the universe; and inflation seems to be implied by some currently interesting
theories of the boundary conditions of the universe. The question has been analyzed only
for theories with a special initial condition, such as the “no-boundary proposal” and the
“tunneling-from-nothing proposal”. Analyses by Hawking and Page [10], Grishchuk and
Rozhansky [28], and Barvinsky and Kamenshchik [29] suggest very large expected lifetimes
for the “no-boundary proposal”. Analyses by Vilenkin [30] and by Mijić, Morris, and Suen
[31] do likewise for the “tunneling-from-nothing” case.
C.
Electromagnetic Radiation
The above discussion suggests that in order to probe the nature of a non-trivial final con-
dition, one should study processes today that are sensitive to that final condition no matter
how far in the future it is imposed. At the conference, P.C.W. Davies suggested that elec-
tromagnetic radiation might provide such a mechanism for “seeing” a final condition in the
arbitrarily far future in realistic cosmologies. In an approximately static and homogeneous
cosmology, radiation must travel through ever more material the longer the time separation
between initial and final conditions. For sufficiently large separations, the universe becomes
opaque to the electromagnetic radiation necessary to probe the details of the final condition
directly. However, in an expanding universe the dilution of matter caused by the expansion
competes with the longer path length as the separation between initial big bang and final big
crunch becomes longer and longer. Davies and Twamley [32] show that, under reasonable
conditions, the expansion wins and that the future light cone is transparent to photons all
the way to a distance from the final singularity comparable to ours from the big bang.
Transparency of the forward light cone raises the possibility of constraining the final
condition by present observations of electromagnetic radiation and perhaps ruling out time-
symmetric boundary conditions. Partridge [33] has actually carried out experiments which
could be interpreted in this way and Davies and Twamley discuss others. The following is
an example of a further argument of a very direct kind.
Suppose the universe to have initial and final classical distributions that are time-
symmetric in the sense of (4.6). Suppose further that these boundary conditions imply
with high probability an initial epoch with stars in galaxies distributed approximately ho-
6
For further discussion see e.g. [14].
14mogeneously and a similar final epoch of stars in galaxies at the symmetric time. Consider
the radiation emitted from a particular star in the present epoch. If the universe is trans-
parent, it is likely to reach the final epoch without being absorbed or scattered. There it
may either be absorbed in the stars or proceed past them towards the final singularity. If a
significant fraction of the radiation proceeds past, then by time-symmetry we should expect
a corresponding amount of radiation to have been emitted from the big bang. Observa-
tions of the brightness of the night sky could therefore constrain the possibility of a final
boundary condition time-symmetrically related to the initial one. The alternative that the
radiation is completely absorbed in future stars implies constraints on present emission that
are probably inconsistent with observation because the total cross section of future stars is
only a small fraction of the whole sky, as it is today.7
By such arguments, made quantitative, and extended to neutrinos, gravitational and
other forms of radiation, we may hope to constrain the final condition of the universe no
matter how long the separation between the big bang and the big crunch.
V.
HYPOTHETICAL QUANTUM COSMOLOGIES WITH TIME SYMMETRIES
A.
CP T - and T -Symmetric Boundary Conditions
The time-neutral generalized quantum mechanics with initial and final conditions devel-
oped in Section III permits the construction of model quantum cosmologies that exhibit
symmetries with respect to reflection about a moment of time. By this we mean that the
probabilities given by (3.1) for a set of alternative histories are identical to those of the
symmetrically related set. This section explores the relations between ρf and ρi and the
conditions on the Hamiltonian under which such symmetries exist.
CP T -symmetric universes are the most straightforward to implement because local field
theory in flat spacetime is invariant under CP T . We expect CP T invariance as well for
field theories in curved cosmological spacetimes such as closed Friedmann universes that are
symmetric under a space inversion and symmetric about a moment of time.
To construct a CP T -invariant quantum cosmology, choose the origin of time so that
the time reflection symmetry is about t = 0. Let Θ denote the antiunitary CP T transfor-
mation and for simplicity consider alternatives {Pαkk (tk )} such that their CP T transforms,
{Peαkk (−tk )}, are given by
Peαkk (−tk ) = Θ−1 Pαkk (tk )Θ .
(5.1)
A CP T -symmetric universe would be one in which the probabilities of histories of alter-
natives at times t1 < t2 < · · · < tn would be identical to the probabilities of the CP T -
transformed histories of alternatives at times −tn < · · · < −t2 < −t1 . Denote by Cα the
string of projection operators representing one history
Cα = Pαnn (tn ) · · · Pα11 (t1 ) ,
7
Thanks are due to D. Craig for discussions of this example.
15
(5.2)eα the corresponding string of CP T -transformed alternatives written in standard
and by C
time order with the earliest alternatives to the right
Thus,
eα ≡ Peα1 (−t1 ) · · · Peαn (−tn ) .
C
n
1(5.3a)
eα = Θ−1 C † Θ .
C
α(5.3b)
The requirement of CP T symmetry is then, from (3.1),



eα ρi C
eα† .
T r ρf Cα ρi Cα† = T r ρf C
(5.4)
Using (5.1), (5.3), the cyclic property of the trace, and the identity T r[AΘ−1 BΘ] =
T r[B † ΘA† Θ−1 ] following from the antiunitarity of Θ, the right hand side of (5.4) may be
rewritten to yield the following form of the requirement of CP T symmetry


T r ρf Cα ρi Cα† = T r Θρi Θ−1 Cα Θρf Θ−1 Cα† .
(5.5)
Evidently a sufficient condition for a CP T -symmetric universe is that the initial and final
conditions be CP T transforms of each other:
ρf = Θρi Θ−1
(5.6)
because acting on Bose operators Θ2 is effectively unity and as a consequence of (5.6)
ρi = Θρf Θ−1 .
As stressed by Page [34], a CP T -symmetric universe can also be realized with within the
usual formulation of quantum mechanics with an initial ρi and a final ρf = I, provided the
ρi representing the condition at the initial instant is CP T -invariant about some time in the
future. Thus, initial and final conditions that are not related by (5.6) do not necessarily
imply differing probabilities for sets of histories connected by CP T . Further, as discussed in
the previous section, both ways of realizing a CP T -symmetric universe can, with appropiate
kinds of initial and final conditions and coarse-graining, lead to sets of histories in which
each individual member is CP T -asymmetric about the moment of symmetry. Thus, neither
are CP T -symmetric boundary conditions necessarily inconsistent with arrows of time that
extend consistently over the whole of the universe’s evolution.
A universe is time-symmetric about a moment of time if the probabilities of any set of
alternative histories are identical to those of the time-inverted set. The relation between
initial and final conditions necessary for a purely time-symmetric universe is analogous to
that for a CP T -symmetric one and derived in the same way. However, we cannot expect
boundary conditions to impose time symmetry if the Hamiltonian itself distinguishes past
from future. We must assume that the Hamiltonian is symmetric under time inversion, T ,
T −1 H(t)T = H(−t) .
(5.7)
Given (5.7), a time-symmetric universe will result if the initial and final conditions are
related by time inversion:
ρf = T ρi T −1 .
(5.8)
16For realistic quantum cosmologies, the time-neutral quantum mechanics of universes in
a box, described in Section III, must be generalized to allow for significant quantum fluc-
tuations in spacetime geometry, and notions of space and time inversion must be similarly
generalized. A sketch of a generalized quantum mechanics for spacetime can be found in
[14] and discussions of time inversion in the quantum mechanics of cosmology in [34], [5],
and [6].
B.
T Violation in the Weak Interactions
The effective Hamiltonian describing the weak interaction on accessible energy scales is
not CP -invariant. As a consequence of the CP T invariance of field theory it is also not T -
invariant. T violation of this kind is a small effect in laboratory experiments but is thought to
be of central importance in the evolution of the matter content of the universe. It is believed
to be responsible, together with the non-conservation of baryons, for the emergence of a
matter-dominated universe from an initial equality of matter and antimatter, as originally
pointed out by Sakharov.8 Can the symmetric universes just discussed be consistent with
this effective T violation in the weak interaction?
The violation of time-inversion symmetry that we observe in the effective weak interac-
tion Hamiltonian could arise in three ways: First, it could be the result of T violation in the
fundamental Hamiltonian. Second, it could arise throughout the universe even if the funda-
mental Hamiltonian were time-inversion-symmetric, from asymmetries in the cosmological
boundary conditions of the universe. Third, it could be an asymmetry of our particular
epoch and spatial location arising dynamically in extended domains from a time-inversion
symmetric Hamiltonian and boundary conditions. We shall now offer a few comments on
each of these possibilities.
If the fundamental Hamiltonian is time-inversion asymmetric, then we cannot expect a
time-symmetric universe, as we have already discussed. One could investigate whether such
a fundamental time asymmetry is the source of the other observed time asymmetries. So
far such an approach has neither been much studied nor shown much promise.
Even though a T -symmetric universe is inconsistent with a T -asymmetric fundamental
Hamiltonian, a CP T -symmetric universe could be realized if the initial and final density
matrices were related by (5.6). That is because a field-theoretic Hamiltonian is always
CP T -symmetric even if it is not T -symmetric. But CP T symmetry needs to be reconciled
with the observed matter-antimatter asymmetry over large domains9 of the universe and the
classical behavior of their matter content. If the universe is homogeneously matter-dominated
now, then CP T symmetry would imply that it will be homogeneously antimatter-dominated
at the time-inverted epoch in the future. What evolution of the present universe could lead
to such an inversion? One possibility is a universe that lasts much longer than the proton
lifetime.10
8
Ref. [36]. For an accessible recent review of these ideas see [37].
For a classic review of the observational evidence that there is a matter-antimatter asymmetry over a
domain at least the size of the local group of galaxies see [38].
10
We owe this suggestion to W. Unruh.
9
17There is no evidence for CP violation in the basic dynamics of superstring theory. If it is
the correct theory, the effective CP violation in the weak interaction in four dimensions has
to arise in the course of compactification or from some other form of spontaneous symmetry
breaking. From the four-dimensional point of view, which we are taking for convenience
in this article, this would correspond to having a non-zero expected value of a CP -odd
quantity. Then, as discussed above, it is possible to investigate time-symmetric universes
with initial and final conditions related by (5.8). An effective CP violation could arise from
CP asymmetries of the initial or final states or both. Typical theories of these boundary
conditions relate them to the Hamiltonian or an equivalent action. Each density matrix, ρi
or ρf , may either inherit the symmetries of the fundamental Hamiltonian or be an asym-
metrical member of a symmetrical family of density matrices determined by it. This is the
case, for example, with “spontaneous symmetry breaking” of familiar field theory where
there are degenerate candidates for the ground state not individually symmetrical under the
symmetries of the Hamiltonian. Before discussing the possibility of effective CP violation in
time-symmetric universes, let us review how an effective CP violation can arise in familiar
field theory and in usual quantum cosmology with just an initial condition.
Effective CP violation can arise in field theory even when the fundamental Hamiltonian
is CP -invariant, provided there is a non-vanishing vacuum expected value of a CP -odd field
φ(~x, t) [39], i.e. one such that
φ(−~x, t) = −(CP)−1 φ(~x, t)(CP) .
(5.9)
Usually the vacuum state |Ψ0 i inherits the symmetry of the Hamiltonian that determines
it and the vacuum expected value of a CP -odd field would vanish if the Hamiltonian is
CP -invariant. However, if there is a symmetrical family of degenerate candidates for the
ground state that are individually not CP -invariant, then the expected value
hφ(~x, t)i = T r [φ(~x, t)|Ψ0 ihΨ0 |]
(5.10)
may be non-zero for the physical vacuum.
Similarly, in usual quantum cosmology with just an initial condition ρi , a non-zero value
of
hφ(~x, t)i = T r [φ(~x, t)ρi ]
(5.11)
can lead to effective CP violation. The “no-boundary” wave function of the universe [35]
is the generalization of the flat space notion of ground state, i.e. vacuum, to the quantum
mechanics of closed cosmological spacetimes. The “no-boundary” prescription with matter
theories that would lead to spontaneous CP violation in flat space thereby becomes an inter-
esting topic for investigation. In such situations, we expect the “no-boundary” construction
to yield a CP -symmetric set of possible wave functions for the universe that are individually
CP -asymmetric.
We now turn to effective CP violation in time-symmetric universes with initial and fi-
nal states related by (5.8). An expected value for a field is defined when probabilities are
assignable to its alternative values — that is, when there is decoherence among the alter-
natives. The requirements of decoherence will be discussed in the next Section. They are
automatically satisfied for alternatives at a single moment of time when ρf ∝ I but they
are non-trivial when ρf is non-trivial. We have not analyzed the circumstances in which the
18values of the field decohere but we assume those circumstances to obtain here so that the
expectation value of the field may be defined.
A consequence of decoherence and the probability formula (3.1) is the validity of two
equivalent expressions for the expected value of the field that are analogous to (5.10) and
(5.11):
hφ(~x, t)i = NT r [ρf φ(~x, t)ρi ] = NT r [ρi φ(~x, t)ρf ] .
(5.12)
These are demonstrated in the Appendix. The symmetry between the initial and final
conditions in (5.12) can be understood from the fact that it is not probabilities at one
moment of time that distinguish the future from the past. We shall now show that for a
CP -odd field this expected value is odd under time inversion for a time-symmetric universe.
We carry over from flat space field theory the assumption that we are dealing with a
CP T -even field φ(~x, t). In flat space that is necessary if the field is to have a non-vanishing
vacuum expected value. The CP T invariance of field theory then means that it is possible
to choose a (real) representation of φ(~x, t) such that
φ(−~x, −t) = (CPT )−1 φ(~x, t)(CPT ) .
Therefore, since φ(~x, t) is CP -odd it must be T -odd and then


hφ(~x, −t)i = −T r ρf T −1 φ(~x, t)T ρi .
But if ρi and ρf are related by (5.8) this relation may be written


hφ(~x, −t)i = −T r T −1 ρi T T −1 φ(~x, t)T T −1 ρf T
= −T r [ρi φ(~x, t)ρf ] = −hφ(~x, t)i .
(5.13)
(5.14)
(5.15)
The conclusion is that it is possible to choose initial and final conditions so that a universe
is time-symmetric and has a non-vanishing expected value of a CP -odd field. That expected
value is odd in time (the correct time-symmetric behavior for a T -odd field.) As a conse-
quence the sign of CP violation would be opposite on opposite sides of the moment of time
symmetry and the magnitude of CP violation would decrease on cosmological time scales
as the moment of time symmetry is approached. The CP violation in the early universe
might well be larger than generally supposed and Sakharov’s mechanism for the generation
of the baryons more effective. However, if the moment of time symmetry is far in our future,
then such variation in the strength of CP violation would be small and it would be difficult
to distinguish this time-symmetric situation from the kind of CP violation that arises from
just an initial condition as discussed above.
In the class of time-symmetric universes just discussed, CP violation arises from initial
and final conditions that are not CP -symmetric. However, an effective CP violation could
also exist in our epoch, in local spatial domains, even if both Hamiltonian and initial and
final states were CP -symmetric:
H = (CP)−1 H(CP) , ρi = (CP)−1 ρi (CP) , ρf = (CP)−1 ρf (CP) .
(5.16)
Dynamical mechanisms would need to exist that make likely the existence of large spacetime
domains in which CP is effectively broken, say by the expected value of a CP -odd field that
grows to be homogeneous over such a domain. In such a picture the set of histories of the
19universe would be overall CP -symmetric and T -symmetric, as follows from (5.16). Individual
histories would display effective CP violation in domains with sizes and durations that are
quantum-probabilistic. If very large sizes and durations were probable it would be difficult
to distinguish this kind of mechanism from any of those discussed above.
Overall matter-antimatter symmetry would be expected for such universes with matter
or anti-matter predominant only in local domains. Their size must therefore be larger than
the known scales on which matter is dominant [38]. The calculation of the probabilities for
these sizes and durations thus becomes an important question in such pictures. An extreme
example occurs in the proposal of Linde [40], in which such domains are far larger than the
present Hubble radius.
VI.
THE LIMITATIONS OF DECOHERENCE AND CLASSICALITY
As we mentioned in Section II, the quantum mechanics of a closed system such as the
universe as a whole predicts probabilities only for those sets of alternative histories for
which there is negligible interference between the individual members in the set. Sets of
histories that exhibit such negligible interference as a consequence of the Hamiltonian and
boundary conditions are said to decohere. A minimal requirement on any theory of the
boundary conditions for cosmology is that the universe exhibit a decoherent set of histories
that corresponds to the quasiclassical domain of everyday experience. This requirement
places significant restrictions on the relation between ρi and ρf in the generalized quantum
mechanics for cosmology, as we shall now show.
A.
Decoherence
Coherence between individual histories in an exhaustive set of coarse-grained histories is
measured by the decoherence functional [20]. This is a complex-valued functional on each
pair of histories in the set. If the cosmos is replaced by a box, so that possible complications
from quantum gravity disappear, then individual coarse-grained histories are specified by
sequences of alternatives α = (α1 , · · · , αn ) at discrete moments of time, t1 , · · · , tn . The
decoherence functional for the case of two-time boundary conditions is given by [15]


D(α′, α) = NT r ρf Cα′ ρi Cα† .
(6.1)
A set of histories decoheres when the real parts of the “off-diagonal” elements of the deco-
herence functional — those between two histories with any αk 6= αk′ — vanish to sufficient
accuracy. As first shown by Griffiths [13], this is the necessary and sufficient condition that
the probabilities (3.1), which are the “diagonal” elements of D, satisfy the sum rules defining
probability theory.
The possibility of decoherence is limited by the choice of initial and final density matrices
ρi and ρf . To see an example of this, consider the case in which both are pure, ρi = |Ψi ><
Ψi | and ρf = |Ψf >< Ψf |. The decoherence functional would then factor:
D(α′ , α) = N < Ψf |Cα′ |Ψi >< Ψi |Cα |Ψf > ,
20
(6.2)where N now is | < Ψi |Ψf > |−2 . In this circumstance the requirement that the real part of
D vanish for α′ 6= α can be satisfied only if there are at most two non-vanishing quantities
< Ψi |Cα |Ψf >, with phases differing by 90◦ , giving at most two histories with non-vanishing
probabilities! Thus initial and final states that are both pure, such as those corresponding to
a “wave function of the universe”, leads to a highly unorthodox quantum mechanics in which
there are only one or two coarse-grained histories. All the apparent accidents of quantum
mechanics would be determined11 by the boundary conditions ρi and ρf . The usual idea of
a simple ρi (or ρi and ρf ), with the algorithmic complexity of the universe contained almost
entirely in the throws of the quantum dice, would here be replaced by a picture in which
the algorithmic complexity is transferred to the state vectors |Ψi i and |Ψf i. Presumably
these would be described by a simple set of rules plus a huge amount of specific information,
unknowable except by experiment and described in practice by a huge set of parameters
with random values.
This bizarre situation refers to the use of a pure ρi and a pure ρf , whether or not there
is any kind of time symmetry relating them.
B.
Impossibility of a Universe with ρf = ρi .
We shall now give a very special example of a relation between ρi and ρf , stronger than
time symmetry, that is inconsistent with the existence of a quasiclassical domain. More
precisely we shall show that in the extreme case
ρf = ρi ≡ ρ
(6.3)
only sets of histories exhibiting trivial dynamics can exactly decohere. This condition means
that ρf has the same form when expressed in terms of the initial fields φ(~x, t0 ) as ρi does.
Such a situation could arise if, in addition to time symmetry, we had ρi and ρf separately,
individually time-symmetric and with effectively no time difference between the initial and
final conditions. We know of no theoretical reason to expect such a situation, but it does
supply an example that leads to a contradiction with experience.
Given the artificial condition, (6.3), we can write the decoherence condition as
(T rρ2 )−1 ReT r(ρCα′ ρCα† ) = δα′ α p(α) ,
(6.4)
where p(α) is the probability of the history α. Summing over all the {αn } and {αn′ } except
αk and αk′ , we have
(T rρ2 )−1 ReT r[ρPαk′k (tk )ρPαkk (tk )] = δα′k αk p(αk ) .
We note that Pαkk (tk ) and Pαk′ (tk ) are just projection operators and thus of the form
k
X
|n >< n| and
n
11
X
|n′ >< n′ |
n′
This situation is closely related to the one described by L. Schulman [41].
21
(6.5)respectively, where the |n > and |n′ > are mutually orthogonal for αk 6= αk′ . Eq. (6.5) then
tells us that
X
(T rρ2 )−1
| < n|ρ|n′ > |2 = 0 for αk 6= αk′ .
(6.6)
n,n′
Thus ρ has no matrix elements between any |n > and any |n′ > for αk 6= αk′ . In other words,
ρ commutes with all the P ’s and therefore with all the chains Cα of P ’s:
[Cα , ρ] = 0 for all α .
(6.7)
This consequence of perfect decoherence for the special case (6.3) has some important im-
plications. For one thing, the decoherence formula can now be written
(T rρ2 )−1 T r(Cα′ ρ2 Cα† ) = δα′ α p(α) ,
(6.8)
so that we are back to ordinary quantum mechanics with only an initial density matrix
ρ̄ ≡ (T rρ2 )−1 ρ2 [cf. (4.5) in the classical case] but with the very restrictive condition
[Cα , ρ̄] = 0 for all α .
(6.9)
The cosmology with the symmetry (6.3) was supposed to be in contrast to the usual one
with only an initial density matrix, and yet it turns out to be only a special case of the
usual one with the stringent set of conditions (6.9) imposed in addition. The resolution of
this apparent paradox is that Eq. (6.9) permits essentially no dynamics and thus achieves
symmetry between ρi and ρf in a rather trivial way. That is not surprising in view of the
nature of this condition discussed above.
We have seen that any Pαkk (tk ) has to commute with ρ̄ if it is to be permitted in a chain of
P ’s constituting a member of a decohering set of alternative coarse-grained histories. Now
it is unreasonable that for a given projection operator P there should be only a discrete set
of times at which it is permissible to use it in a history (e.g., for a measurement). Thus
we would expect that there should be a continuous range of such times, which means that
Ṗ = −i[P, H] must commute with ρ̄. But ρ̄ and P , since they commute, are simultaneously
diagonalizable, with eigenvalues πi and qi respectively. The time derivative of the probability
T r(ρ̄P ) is
X
T r(ρ̄Ṗ ) = −iT r(ρ̄[P, H]) = −i
πi (qi − qi )Hii = 0 .
(6.10)
i
The probabilities of the different projections P remain constant in time, so that there is
essentially no dynamics and certainly no second law of thermodynamics.
C.
Classicality
A theory of the boundary conditions of the universe must imply the quasiclassical domain
of familiar experience. A set of histories describing a quasiclassical domain must, of course,
decohere. That is the prerequisite for assigning probabilities in quantum mechanics. But
further, the probabilities must be high that these histories are approximately correlated
by classical dynamical laws, except for the intervention of occasional amplified quantum
fluctuations.
22There are, of course, limitations on classical two-time boundary conditions. We cannot,
for example, specify both coördinates and their conjugate momenta at both an initial and a
final time. There would, in general, be no corresponding solutions of the classical equations
of motion. Even if initial and final conditions in quantum cosmology allow for decoherence
as discussed above, they could still be too restrictive to allow for classical correlations. One
would expect this to be the case, for example, if they required a narrow distribution of
both coordinates and momenta both initially and finally. Quantum cosmologies with two
boundary conditions are therefore limited by both decoherence and classicality.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS
Time-symmetric quantum cosmologies can be constructed utilizing a time-neutral gen-
eralized quantum mechanics of closed systems with initial and final conditions related by
time-inversion symmetry. From the point of view of familiar quantum mechanics such time-
symmetric cosmologies are highly unusual. If we think of Hilbert space as finite-dimensional,
we could introduce a normalization T r(ρf ) T r(ρi ) = T r(I), which would agree with the
usual case T r(ρi ) = 1, T r(ρf ) = T r(I). (Note that both N = T r(ρf ρi ) and the quantity
T r(ρf ) T r(ρi ) are invariant under multiplication of ρi by a factor and ρf by the inverse
factor.) With this normalization we may think of N −1 = T r(ρf ρi ) as a measure of the
likelihood of the final condition given the initial one. The similarly defined quantity N −1
in the analogous classical time-symmetric cosmologies is just that. It is the fraction of tra-
jectories meeting the initial condition that also meet the final one [cf. (4.1)]. The measure
N −1 is unity for the usual cases where ρf = I. It can be expected to be very small for
large systems with time-symmetric boundary conditions, as the simple model described in
Figure 1 suggests. The measure N −1 is likely to be extraordinarily small in the case of the
universe itself. Were it exactly zero the initial and final boundary condition construction
would become doubtful. We are unsure how much of that doubt survives if it is merely
extraordinarily small.
As a prerequisite for a time-symmetric quantum cosmology, the fundamental Hamiltonian
must be time-inversion symmetric to give a meaningful notion of time-symmetry and this
restricts the mechanisms by which the effective CP violation in the weak interactions can
arise. There must be some impurity in the initial or final density matrices or in both for any
non-trivial probabilities to be predicted at all. If we wish to exclude the highly unorthodox
quantum mechanics in which |Ψii and |Ψf i determine all the throws of the quantum dice,
then we could not have, for example, a time-symmetric quantum cosmology with both the
initial and final conditions resembling something like the “no-boundary” proposal. These
results have been obtained by assuming unrealistic exact decoherence and by neglecting
gross quantum variations in the structure of spacetime, which may be important in the early
universe. It would be desirable to extend the discussion to remove these special restrictions.
Even if these purely theoretical requirements for time-symmetry were met, observations
might rule out such boundary conditions. Deviations from the usual thermodynamic or CP
arrows of time may be undetectably small if the time between initial and final conditions
is long enough. But, as suggested by Davies and Twamley, an expanding and contracting
time-symmetric cosmology may be transparent enough to electromagnetic and other forms of
radiation that the effects of time-symmetric initial and final conditions would be inconsistent
23with observations today. In the absence of some compelling theoretical principle mandating
time symmetry, the simplest possibility seems to be the usually postulated universe where
there is a fundamental distinction between past and future — a universe with a special initial
state and a final condition of indifference with respect to state. Nevertheless, the notion of
complete T symmetry or CP T symmetry remains sufficiently intriguing to warrant further
investigation of how such a symmetry could occur or what observations could rule it out. In
this paper we have provided a quantum-mechanical framework for such investigations.
