Perspective
The Higgs boson turns ten
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04899-4
Gavin P. Salam1,2, Lian-Tao Wang3 & Giulia Zanderighi4,5 ✉
Received: 22 March 2022
Accepted: 24 May 2022
Published online: 4 July 2022
Check for updates
The discovery of the Higgs boson, ten years ago, was a milestone that opened the door
to the study of a new sector of fundamental physical interactions. We review the role
of the Higgs field in the Standard Model of particle physics and explain its impact on
the world around us. We summarize the insights into Higgs physics revealed so far by
ten years of work, discuss what remains to be determined and outline potential
connections of the Higgs sector with unsolved mysteries of particle physics.
Ten years ago, on 4 July 2012, scientists and journalists gathered at
CERN, and remotely around the world, for the announcement of the
discovery of a new fundamental particle, the Higgs boson. The dis-
covery, by the ATLAS1 and CMS2 collaborations at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC), came almost 50 years after theorists had postulated
the existence of such a particle. The significance of the discovery was
not only that a new, long-awaited particle had been found, but that the
existence of this particle provides first direct evidence that surrounding
us there is a new kind of fundamental ‘field’, known as the Higgs field.
Fields in physics are familiar in everyday life, for example in the form
of the earth’s magnetic field, and its impact on the needle of a compass.
The most important difference between the Higgs field and a mag-
netic field is that if one removes the magnetic source, the magnetic
field disappears. By contrast, the Higgs field is non-zero everywhere,
all the time, independently of whether anything else is present in the
Universe. In a way, it is reminiscent of the ancient Greek concept of
Aether with the crucial difference that it is consistent with Einstein’s
theory of special relativity.
Physicists’ current theory of fundamental particles and forces is
known as the Standard Model, a theoretical framework that provides
a description of elementary particles and the forces that make them
interact with one another, with the exception of gravity. Within the
Standard Model, the Higgs field is essential to describe the world as
we know it.
As we shall see below, the strength of the interaction between any
particle and the Higgs field directly affects a fundamental property
of that particle: its mass. As such3, it ultimately determines the size of
atoms, makes the proton stable and sets the timescale of radioactive
(β) decays, which for example impact the lifetime of stars (Table 1). Yet,
in everyday life, we do not notice that the Higgs field is all around us.
The only way we have of revealing the Higgs field is to perturb it, a little
like throwing a stone into water and seeing the ripples. The particle
known as the Higgs boson is the manifestation of such a perturbation.
The significance of its discovery in 2012 was such that the Nobel
prize was awarded one year later to François Englert and Peter Higgs
who, with the late Robert Brout, were the first to discuss the potential
importance of such a field for fundamental physics4–6. Since then, the
Higgs boson has become a powerful tool to study the ways in which
the underlying Higgs field affects the fundamental particles of the
Standard Model. Furthermore, the ubiquity of the Higgs field means
that the Higgs boson is, today, widely used in the search for signatures
of particles or effects that are hitherto unknown and lie outside the
Standard Model.
The Higgs boson in the Standard Model
In the Standard Model, aside from the Higgs boson, there are two kinds
of particles. There are fermions, such as the up and down quarks and
the electron, which make up ordinary matter. These specific particles
(together with one of the three neutrinos) are called first-generation
fermions. Two further sets of fermions (second and third generations)
involve heavier particles, not normally present in the world around
us. Additionally, there are the force carriers: the photon, the W and
Z bosons and the gluon, collectively called vector bosons. When these
are exchanged between two fermions, they create an attractive or repul-
sive force between those fermions: photons carry the electromagnetic
force, W and Z bosons the weak force and gluons the strong force.
In the 1960s, as physicists were taking the first steps towards assem-
bling this picture, it remained unclear whether a self-consistent theory
that included massive force carriers could be constructed. This ques-
tion was being posed in the context of nuclear physics and also super-
conductivity in condensed matter physics. Researchers found that
such a theory was ultimately possible if one introduced an interaction
of the force carriers with a ‘Higgs’ field, and if one could also engineer
a non-zero value for that field4–9.
As the electroweak part of the Standard Model was being devel-
oped10–12, interactions of particles with a Higgs field were to become a
central part of its formulation, especially in order to generate masses
for the W and Z bosons, as required for consistency with experimental
observations, while photons and gluons remain massless.
Remarkably, interactions with the Higgs field also provided a con-
sistent theoretical mechanism for producing fermion masses: each
fermion interacts with the Higgs field with a different strength (or
‘coupling’), and the stronger the interaction, the larger the resulting
mass for the particle. Within the Standard Model the interaction is
known as a ‘Yukawa’ interaction13. Thus any question about the origin
of the masses of fermions reduces to a question about the origin of the
interactions of fermions with the Higgs field.
Why is the Higgs field non-zero in the first place? According to the Stand-
ard Model there is a potential energy density associated with the value of
the Higgs field and the lowest potential energy corresponds to a non-zero
value of the Higgs field. The Standard Model potential has a form dictated
by internal consistency conditions. With some simplifications, labelling
the magnitude of the Higgs field as ϕ, the potential has the form
V (ϕ) ∝ − ϕ 2 +
1 4
ϕ .
2
(1)
1
Rudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 2All Souls College, Oxford, UK. 3University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. 4Max Planck
Institute for Physics, Munich, Germany. 5Physik-Department, Technische Universität München, Garching, Germany. ✉e-mail: zanderi@mpp.mpg.de
Nature | Vol 607 | 7 July 2022 | 41Perspective
This is illustrated by the red line in Fig. 1. The minimum of the potential,
that is, the energetically most favourable choice for ϕ, lies at a value of ϕ
that is non-zero, ϕ = 1. An important implication of the non-zero constant
value of the Higgs field is the impossibility to carry angular momentum,
or more technically having ‘spin 0’. A non-zero value for the spin would
break at least one of the well-tested space–time symmetries. Hence, the
excitation of the Higgs field, the Higgs boson, must be a spin-0 particle
and it is in fact the only known fundamental particle with this property.
One of the reasons for the central importance of the discovery of the
Higgs boson was that it finally made it possible to start testing the remark-
able theoretical picture outlined above. It is not possible to probe the
interactions of a given particle with the Higgs field. However, one can
instead measure a particle’s interaction with the excitations of the Higgs
field, that is, with a Higgs boson. If the Standard Model provides the correct
picture for the generation of mass, the strength of any particle’s interac-
tion with the Higgs boson has to be directly related to that particle’s mass.
Aside from providing a powerful way of testing the Higgs mecha-
nism, the interaction of the Higgs boson with other particles is intrigu-
ing because it implies the existence of a ‘fifth force’, mediated by the
exchange of Higgs bosons. The fact that such a force is stronger for heavier
particles makes it qualitatively different from all other interactions in
the Standard Model, whose interaction strengths come in multiples
of some basic unit of charge, like the electron charge for the electric
force. The pattern is, if anything, more reminiscent of gravity, but with
42 | Nature | Vol 607 | 7 July 2022
important differences. One is that the force mediated by the Higgs boson
is active only at very short distances, whereas Einstein’s gravity acts over
all distance scales. Another is that the Higgs boson couples directly only
to elementary Standard Model particles. By contrast, gravity couples to
the total mass. In ordinary matter, that total mass is much larger than
the sum of the elementary particle masses, because the strong force
contributes substantially to the proton and neutron masses14.
What we know so far and how
The Higgs mechanism provides the simplest model to explain particle
masses in a way that is consistent with the electroweak interactions. As
physicists we should seek to establish whether it is the model chosen
by nature.
Experimental studies of the Higgs boson take place at particle colliders.
The likelihood of producing a Higgs boson in a collision becomes larger
when the particles that collide interact strongly with the Higgs field,
that is, when they are heavy. At the high centre-of-mass energies that
are required, particle physicists know how to collide just two things:
protons and electrons, as well as their antiparticles. That poses an issue,
because electrons and the particles that make up protons are light, that
is, they interact only very weakly with the Higgs boson.
The approach of particle physicists is to exploit the occasional pro-
duction of heavy particles in the high-energy collision of light particles,
and to then have those heavy particles produce a Higgs boson. CERN’s
LHC collides protons, which are mostly made of up and down quarks
and gluons. The most frequent way of producing a Higgs boson is for a
pair of gluons, one from each proton, to collide and create a top quark
and a top anti-quark as a very short-lived quantum fluctuation. The top
quark is the heaviest known particle (about 184 times the proton mass)
and so the top and anti-top quarks interact strongly with the Higgs
field, thereby occasionally producing a Higgs boson. A short while
later (about 10−22 s), the Higgs boson decays. About 2.6% of decays are
to a pair of Z bosons, which themselves also decay almost immediately,
for example each to an electron–positron or muon–anti-muon pair
(so-called charged leptons), which gives a distinctive experimental
signature. This sequence is illustrated in Fig. 2a.
The ATLAS and CMS experiments at the LHC select events with four
such leptons and record the total of the energy of the leptons (in their
centre-of-mass frame). There are a variety of ways in which four lep-
tons can be produced, but for those events in which they come from a
Higgs-boson decay, the total energy is expected to cluster around the
Higgs mass—the red peak in Fig. 2b. That red peak provides consider-
able information: (1) the existence of the peak near 125 GeV tells us
that there is a new particle, the Higgs boson; (2) the position of the
peak indicates the mass of the Higgs boson; (3) other features of the
events in the peak, for example the relative angular distributions ofa
the leptons (not shown in the figure), confirm that the Higgs boson car-
ries no intrinsic angular momentum, that is, it is a spin-0 particle; (4) the
number of events in the peak is sensitive to the interaction strength of
the Higgs boson both with top quarks and with Z bosons. This last point
is crucial because the Standard Model Higgs mechanism predicts a very
specific interaction strength of each particle with the Higgs boson.
Point (4) provides us with a first test of this hypothesis.
There are several potential concerns about the robustness of these
kinds of test. For instance, in the process shown in Fig. 2 there is an
assumption that there was a quantum fluctuation producing a top–
anti-top pair. Even if that assumption is correct, the number of events
in the peak tells us about the product of the top and Z interactions, not
the top and Z interactions separately. For this reason, the LHC experi-
ments look for the Higgs boson in a multitude of production and decay
processes, each one with complementary sensitivity. For example, it is
possible to observe Higgs-boson decays in events in which top quarks
are not simply an evanescent quantum fluctuation, but are instead pro-
duced as short-lived real particles that emerge in their own right from
the collision together with the Higgs boson and can be experimentally
detected. Doing so15,16, in 2018, was a major milestone in particle physics,
as were the highly challenging observations of the Higgs boson decaying
to bottom quarks17,18 and τ leptons19,20. Together, these measurements
conclusively established that the Higgs mechanism is responsible for
the mass of the full third generation of charged fermions.
Overall, by assembling information from different production and
decay channels, a picture has emerged of Higgs interactions for the
heaviest particles—both vector bosons and fermions—that is consistent
with the Standard Model hypothesis to within the current measure-
ment accuracies that range from 5% to 20%, as summarized in Fig. 3.
On the other hand, interactions with very light particles, such as the
electron and up and down quarks of which we are made of, are too rare
for current methods to observe.
Although the discovery of the Standard Model Higgs boson was highly
anticipated at the LHC, the ability to explore so many of its features was a
surprise. To have established even part of the broad picture of Higgs-boson
interactions in just ten years is a major achievement, especially when one
considers that, at the time when the LHC was being commissioned, many
of the production and decay channels that are central to today’s measure-
ments were believed to be beyond the reach of the LHC21,22.
There are many reasons why this progress has been possible. One of
them is that nature happens to have chosen a value for the Higgs mass
that is particularly fortunate for experimental studies. Had the Higgsboson been 50 GeV heavier, it would have been almost impossible to
detect more than just two basic decay channels (to a pair of W bosons
or a pair of Z bosons). Had it been just 10 GeV lighter, the decays to
W bosons and Z bosons would probably have been impossible to see
so far. It was not just a question of good fortune, however.
The excellent performance of the LHC accelerator and of the ATLAS
and CMS detectors, each of them a highly complex system, has been cru-
cial. Furthermore, in the past ten years, there have been major advances
in techniques for analysing collider data. One facet has been to learn
how to reliably extract information about individual proton–proton
collisions when detectors contain not just one proton–proton collision
at a time, but dozens filling the detector simultaneously, 40 million
times per second23,24. Another reflects the fact that the beautifully clear
peak in Fig. 2b is the exception rather than the rule: for most other
Higgs-boson studies (for example, Higgs decay to two bottom quarks
or two W bosons), experimenters and theorists have had to develop a
wide range of technology for differentiating Higgs-boson signals from
the many processes with signatures similar to that of a Higgs boson,
but that do not involve a Higgs boson. These studies are increasingly
benefiting from a combination of new ideas for how to perform the
analyses (for example, ref. 25) and the power of machine learning26.
The quantitative interpretation of observed signal rates in terms of
Higgs interaction strengths would also not have been possible without
several decades of progress in the prediction and modelling of the
rich array of effects that occur when protons collide, often associated
with the strong interaction. It is crucial, for example, to have excellent
theoretical control over the rate of quark and gluon collisions given a
certain number of proton collisions27,28. Another facet is that collisions
often involve not just one quantum fluctuation, as in Fig. 2, but multiple
additional quantum fluctuations, each one of which modifies the prob-
ability of Higgs-boson production. The greater the number of quantum
fluctuations that one can account for in theoretical predictions (today
up to three additional fluctuations29), the more accurately one can
relate experimental observations to the Standard Model30,31. Finally,
Fig. 2 is a vastly simplified picture and the experiments rely profoundly
on accurate simulation32,33 of the full structure of proton–proton colli-
sions, involving the production of hundreds of particles per collision.
What is still to be established?
In many respects, the experimental exploration of the Higgs sec-
tor is only in its infancy. There are two broad directions of ongoing
investigation: obtaining higher precision in studies of interactions that
have already been observed and detecting further kinds of interactions
that are, so far, yet to be seen.
We start with the question of precision. Examining Fig. 3b, one sees
that the interactions of the Higgs boson with W and Z bosons and the
third-generation charged leptons and quarks are currently known
to a precision of about 5–20%. We would not consider the theory of
electromagnetism established if we had only verified the strength of
electromagnetic forces to within 10% accuracy.
One of the reasons for aiming for higher precision is that even though
the Standard Model Higgs mechanism outlined above is the simplest
model that is consistent with data, it is far from being the only viable
one. Indeed, as we shall elaborate on below, it is widely believed that the
Standard Model as it stands cannot be a complete description of nature.
For example, it is conceivable that the Higgs boson is not an elementary
particle, but rather is composed of other, yet-to-be discovered parti-
cles. High-precision measurements of Higgs-related processes can be
very sensitive to such extensions of the Standard Model. In particular,
the rates of Higgs-related processes could be affected by quantum
fluctuations involving any new particles. Such effects might be visible
even in scenarios where the new particles are too heavy to be directly
produced and observed at a given collider. In general, increasing the
precision by a factor of four effectively doubles the mass scale that can
be indirectly probed for those new particles.
The path for improvement is conceptually straightforward: with 20
times more data to come in the next 15–20 years from the approved
high-luminosity upgrade of the LHC, and foreseeable improvements
in analysis techniques and theoretical calculations, the ATLAS and
CMS experiments expect to determine the currently observed set of
interactions to within a couple of percent34. Reaching beyond that
requires a different kind of collider. An electron–positron collider with
centre-of-mass energies of around 250 GeV (a ‘Higgs factory’)35–39 is
widely considered to be a promising option (see the European Strategy
for Particle Physics40). Advantages are that electrons and positrons, in
contrast to protons, are simple fundamental particles, and that the mainHiggs-boson production mechanisms at an electron–positron collider
are largely free of complications associated with strong interactions.
Such a collider could improve the precision of our knowledge of the
Higgs interactions by a further factor of about ten41.
Let us now turn to a discussion of interactions that are yet to be
observed. Notwithstanding the good prospects for dramatically
improving the precision of Higgs measurements connected with the
vector bosons and third-generation (heaviest) quarks and leptons,
recall that the relevance of the Higgs sector for our everyday life is that
it is believed to generate masses for the first (lightest) generation of
fundamental particles, the electron and up and down quarks. Even
though experimentally testing our theoretical expectations for the
interactions between first-generation fermions and the Higgs boson
is highly challenging, there are prospects for the second generation,
and in particular the interactions of the Higgs boson with the muon,
which can be observed through the H → μ+μ− decay. So far the data is
suggestive of such decays42,43, and definitive observation of H → μ+μ−,
if it occurs at a rate that is compatible with the Standard Model, is
expected to come in the next decade. Measurements involving the rest
of the second generation are more difficult.
The LHC can exclude anomalously large interactions of the Higgs
boson with charm quarks34 (for example, using ideas such as those in
refs. 44,45). It has long been thought that to definitively observe H → cc
decays would require a future e+e− collider (or alternatively an electron–
proton collider46). Significant recent improvements in sensitivity to this
decay channel at the LHC47,48 raise the question of whether future devel-
opments can bring its observation within reach of the high-luminosity
LHC. For other Yukawa interactions, the path is less clear.
Investigations are ongoing to establish the potential sensitivity of a
future e+e− collider to electron and strange-quark Yukawa interactions
(see, for example, ref. 49), although currently it seems that it will be chal-
lenging to obtain a statistically conclusive signal. For the coupling of up
and down quarks to the Higgs boson, there are currently no concrete
possibilities in sight unless those couplings are very strongly enhanced
relative to the Standard Model expectation. There has been discussion of
whether precise atomic physics measurements could be sensitive to the
Higgs forces involving light quarks50; however, this seems challenging51.
Central to all of Higgs physics is the Higgs potential. Recall that the
Higgs field is non-zero everywhere in the Universe, and so produces
non-zero masses for fermions and electroweak bosons, because the
minimum of the Higgs potential, equation (1) and Fig. 1, lies at a non-zero
value of the Higgs field ϕ. One of the most important open questions
in Higgs physics is whether the potential written in that equation is the
one chosen by nature. We cannot directly explore the potential across
different values of the Higgs field. However, it turns out that the spe-
cific shape of the potential in the immediate vicinity of the minimum
determines the probability of an important process—the splitting of a
Higgs boson into two (or even three) Higgs bosons; this kind of process
is referred to as a Higgs-boson self-interaction. Accurate observation
of such a process is widely considered to be the best (but not the only52)
way of experimentally establishing whether the world we live in is con-
sistent with that simple potential. By the end of the high-luminosity
LHC’s operation in 15–20 years, the ATLAS and CMS experiments are
expected to see first indications of the simultaneous production of two
Higgs bosons. However, gathering conclusive evidence for a contribu-
tion to Higgs-pair production from the splitting of a first Higgs boson
almost certainly requires a more powerful collider and several options
are under discussion36,53–56.
Higgs and major open questions of particle physics and
cosmology
Many of the above measurements are of interest not just owing to the
fundamental nature of the Higgs sector within the Standard Model,
but because they are also sensitive to scenarios that extend the role of
the Higgs sector beyond that in the Standard Model. Even though the
Standard Model has successfully passed all the numerous experimental
tests so far, it leaves open several major questions. To various degrees,
the Higgs boson is tied to potential solutions to these puzzles.
We close our discussion with an overview of some of these possi-
ble connections, illustrated in Fig. 4, as they play an important role in
guiding ongoing experimental and theoretical research directions in
particle physics. There is a lot of ground to cover, so we will begin with
and give more emphasis to aspects closely related to the Higgs boson,
and only briefly mention later some of the more speculative ideas.
One major puzzle is that the weak and Higgs interactions are much
stronger, by a factor of about 1032, than the gravitational interaction.
This is especially challenging if one harbours the hope—as do many
physicists—that all the known interactions might come from a unifying
and simpler framework. Over the past decades, the desire to explain
the origin of this large difference, the so-called ‘hierarchy problem’,
has motivated a range of theoretical proposals.
One possibility is for the Higgs boson not to be an elementary particle,
but rather a composite object made of other, as yet undiscovered par-
ticles63. Examples of other well studied proposals are new (approxi-
mate) space–time symmetries64–66 and new space dimensions67–70. More
recently, some more speculative ideas suggested possible connections
between the weak scale and cosmological evolution71–73 or the amount
of dark energy in the Universe74,75.
Without one of these proposals, or a new mechanism yet to be
thought of, the hierarchy between the weak and the gravitational
interaction can only arise if distinct parameters in some ultimate fun-
damental theory cancel to within 1 part in 1032. This is known as the
fine-tuning problem of the Higgs sector.
The discovery of the Higgs boson brought such questions unavoid-
ably to the fore. The mere existence of the Higgs boson, and the (still
approximate) picture of its properties, already exclude many theoreti-
cal ideas. In comparison with the decades before its discovery, we now
have a much clearer target and sharper questions to answer with our
theoretical models.
Another important question is why there is more matter than anti-
matter in the Universe. This so-called baryonic asymmetry cannot
be explained within the Standard Model. Such an asymmetry can be
generated if a suitable set of conditions is met76. One promising avenue
that is being explored follows the history of the Universe as it cooled
down after the Big Bang.
When the Universe was very hot, the minimum of the Higgs potential
at a non-zero value of the Higgs field was largely irrelevant because
temperature fluctuations were much larger than the depth of the poten-
tial. As the Universe cooled, the situation changed. Within the Stand-
ard Model that change is smooth. Other promising scenarios, which
involve new particles interacting with the Higgs boson, would generate
a sharper transition, which sets the stage for generating the observed
baryon asymmetry77, although further ingredients are also needed.
These scenarios involve more complex structures for the Higgs
potential, and at least one new particle at the electroweak energy
scale, which can be searched for at the LHC either through its direct
production or through its indirect impact on the Higgs couplings, in
particular the Higgs self-interaction. A measurement of the latter is
Nature | Vol 607 | 7 July 2022 | 45Perspective
therefore essential to shed light on this question. Early-Universe phase
transitions could also produce gravitational signatures that can be
detected by future gravitational wave experiments78,79.
In addition to the questions directly related to the Higgs boson
mentioned above, there are also other contexts in which the Higgs
boson can play an important role. One example of this is the question
of dark matter. Astrophysical and cosmological observations show
that the majority of the matter in the Universe is dark and not made of
any particle we know of. Such observations rely on the gravitational
effects of the dark matter on ordinary, Standard Model matter. At the
same time, we know very little about the non-gravitational properties
of dark matter. New particles with masses around the electroweak and
Higgs mass scales can be promising dark-matter candidates.
As the Higgs mechanism is responsible for generating similar masses
of the Standard Model particles, it is possible that it plays some role in
generating the dark-matter mass as well80–82. There are also scenarios in
which the dark-matter sector involves more than one kind of particle.
Similar to particles in the Standard Model, they could have their own
interactions, and a whole set of other closely related particles. In this
case, the Higgs boson would provide a portal to a new ‘dark world’83.
The origin of the pattern of masses and interactions among different
generations of the Standard Model particles is an intriguing puzzle. For
example, first-generation quarks are much lighter than third-generation
quarks, which in the Standard Model needs to be arranged manually
by setting correspondingly disparate values of the Yukawa couplings.
Understanding the origin of this pattern has also been the focus of dec-
ades of efforts. As the Higgs sector is responsible for generating the
masses of these particles, it is tempting to think that the actual Higgs
sector may be structurally different from the Standard Model, in a way
that causes the observed pattern to emerge naturally84–86.
The models that explore such ideas often lead to predictions of
modified interactions between the Higgs boson and the quarks (and/
or leptons). One signature of such models is that the Higgs boson could
decay into a pair of quarks or leptons with different flavour. Similarly,
one may also ask whether the Higgs mechanism has a role in generating
the extremely small masses for neutrinos and various models have
been envisaged in this respect87.
The questions above relate the Higgs boson with known or unknown
elementary particles. However, there are also mysteries in fundamental
physics that go beyond such types of questions and speculative, yet
intriguing, links have been proposed with the Higgs sector. For example,
it has been noted that the Standard Model self-interaction of the Higgs
boson becomes very close to zero if it is measured88–90 at energies nine
orders of magnitude beyond the Higgs mass91,92. A curious and connected
fact is that it seems likely that the Standard Model Higgs sector has a
ground state with lower energy than the state we live in. Hence, quan-
tum mechanics would allow a ‘tunnelling’ process through which our
whole Universe can decay, even though the probability of such an event
happening within the 14-billion year age of the Universe is tiny. The final
possibility that we mention for new dynamics of the Higgs field at high
energies is a possible link to inflation, which is a period of exponential
expansion in the early niverse that is essential to explain the striking
long-distance uniformity of the cosmic microwave background. The
Higgs boson, having spin 0, may be responsible for driving inflation93.
The Higgs boson is an invaluable tool in the search for answers to sev-
eral of the above questions. Many of the proposed solutions predict the
existence of new particles that generally interact directly with the Higgs
boson. These particles are actively searched for at high-energy colliders.
Still, even if the direct production of these particles lies outside our reach,
for instance because the LHC is not energetic enough, their involve-
ment in quantum fluctuations may affect Higgs-boson production
and decay, in the same way that top-quark quantum fluctuations
mediate Higgs production in Fig. 2. The expected future advances in
precision measurements of the Higgs boson, as mentioned above, will
bring considerably improved sensitivity to such scenarios.
46 | Nature | Vol 607 | 7 July 2022
Conclusions
The discovery of the Higgs boson at the LHC marked the beginning
of a new era of particle physics. In the ten years since, the exploration
of the Higgs sector has progressed far beyond original expectations,
owing to ingenious advances both experimental and theoretical.
Every Higgs-related measurement so far has been consistent with the
Standard Model, the simplest of all current models of particle physics:
a remarkable win for Occam’s razor. Today, it is clear that the Higgs
mechanism, first proposed in the 1960s, is responsible not only for
the masses of the W and Z bosons and but also for those of the three
heaviest fermions. This directly implies the existence of a fifth force,
mediated by the Higgs boson. Still, much remains to be probed. What-
ever is found in the coming decades, we will be wiser: either with solid
evidence for parts of the Standard Model that remain crucially to be
established, such as the nature of the Higgs potential, or by opening
a window to new horizons and the major mysteries of the Universe.
