INSIGHT REVIEW
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007|doi:10.1038/nature06075
High-energy colliders and the rise of the
standard model
Terry Wyatt1
Over the past quarter of a century, experiments at high-energy particle colliders have established the
standard model as the precise theory of particle interactions up to the 100 GeV scale. A series of important
experimental discoveries and measurements have filled in most of the missing pieces and tested the
predictions of the standard model with great precision.
The standard model of particle physics describes the Universe as being
composed of a rather small number of different types of elementary
particle (see page 270) that interact in a small number of well-defined
different ways.
Interactions among the elementary particles are represented by Feyn-
man diagrams such as those in Fig. 1a. These show the annihilation of
an electron–positron (e+e−) pair to produce a fermion–antifermion pair
(such as a quark–antiquark or lepton–antilepton pair), and such interac-
tions are examples of the ‘electroweak’ interaction, which is propagated
by the photon, W ± and Z bosons. All of the fermions participate in the
electroweak interaction; certain ‘self-interactions’ among the photon,
W and Z bosons may also take place.
Quarks, but not leptons, also participate in the strong interaction,
which is propagated by gluons and described by the theory of quantum
chromodynamics (QCD). Collectively, quarks and gluons are referred
to as ‘partons’. Quarks may carry one of three ‘colours’, which in the
1
strong interaction are the analogue of charge; antiquarks carry the
equivalent anticolour. A particular feature of the strong interaction is
that coloured quarks cannot exist as free particles for more than about
10−24 s. The particles we observe in our detectors are hadrons — col-
lections of quarks and/or antiquarks that have no net colour. There are
two basic types of hadron: mesons contain a quark and an antiquark (of
opposite colour); baryons contain three quarks (one of each colour).
When a high-energy quark or gluon is produced, it is observed as a
collimated ‘jet’ of hadrons.
The Higgs mechanism is introduced into the standard model to allow
elementary particles to have non-zero masses, through their interac-
tion with the Higgs field, while maintaining the gauge invariance of
the model. A consequence of including the Higgs mechanism is that a
massive, spin-zero Higgs boson is also predicted to exist.
If the mathematical structure of the standard model is taken as a given
(although, of course, it represents a considerable amount of empirical
input!), then all particle couplings are predicted in terms of a relatively
small number of ‘free’ parameters that must be determined by experi-
ments. For example, the strong interaction is determined by the value
of a single coupling constant, denoted αs. In the electroweak sector, the
physically observed photon and Z boson arise from a linear superposi-
tion of two hypothetical particles: the W 0, the electrically neutral partner
of the W ±, and another neutral boson, B0 (of the so-called ‘hypercharge’
interaction). A rotation angle is defined between the W 0/B0 and Z/pho-
ton, known as the electroweak mixing angle, θW, which describes the
relative strengths of the electromagnetic and weak interaction. The
interactions of the photon, Z and W are then determined by three free
parameters. Logically, these can be thought of as the coupling constants
of the weak and hypercharge interactions and the electroweak mixing
angle. The masses of the W and Z bosons can also be predicted in terms
of these parameters (with the photon and gluon required to be mass-
less by gauge invariance). The masses of the 12 fermions and the Higgs
boson are not predicted and thus represent additional free parameters
that must be determined by experiment.
A particular feature of the electroweak interactions is that the cou-
plings of the fermions to the W and Z depend on their handedness or
helicity. The W ± couples only to left-handed (negative-helicity) fermions
and right-handed (positive-helicity) antifermions. The Z couples to both
left- and right-handed fermions, but with a different coupling constant
in each case.
In simple terms, the basic aims of particle physics are to find direct
experimental evidence for each of the elementary particles and to
make as precise as possible measurements of their various properties
Particle Physics Group, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
274INSIGHT REVIEW
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007
(masses, coupling strengths and so on). Because the number of different
experimental measurements that can be made is much larger than the
number of free parameters in the standard model, we are dealing with
an ‘over-constrained’ system. That is, our experimental measurements
not only determine the values of the free parameters of the standard
model, they also provide stringent tests of the consistency of the model’s
predictions.
Hadron
calorimeters
and return yoke
Electromagnetic
calorimeters
Muon
detectors
Electrons versus protons
For more than a quarter of a century, the high-energy frontier of particle
physics has been dominated by experiments performed at particle–anti-
particle colliders. In these accelerators, beams of electrons and posi-
trons, or protons (p) and antiprotons (p‒), travel with equal and opposite
momenta and collide head-on in the centre of the particle detectors.
Experiments at electron colliders have several advantages over those at
proton colliders, which stem from the fact that electrons are elementary
particles. When an e+e− pair annihilates, the initial state is well defined
and, if the pair collide at equal and opposite momentum, the centre-of-
mass energy of the system (Ecm) is equal to the sum of the beam energies.
Ecm is the energy available to produce the final-state particles.
Electrons participate only in the electroweak interaction. This means
that the total e+e− annihilation cross-section is small, so event rates in
experiments are low, but essentially every annihilation event is ‘interest-
ing’, and the observed events are relatively simple to analyse. Initial-state
bremsstrahlung (radiation from the beam particles) can reduce the avail-
able centre-of-mass energy, but because this is a purely electromagnetic
process it can be calculated with great precision, and it introduces no
significant systematic uncertainties into the analysis of annihilation
events.
The disadvantage of using electrons as beam particles is their small
rest mass. When high-energy electrons are accelerated, they lose energy
(producing synchrotron radiation), and that energy loss must be com-
pensated by the machine’s accelerating cavities. The energy radiated
by a charged particle in performing a circular orbit of radius, R, is pro-
portional to γ4/R, where γ is the ratio of the particle’s total energy to its
rest mass, m0c2. Even though the world’s largest particle accelerator, the
Large Electron–Positron Collider (LEP), at CERN, had a circumference
of 27 km, its maximum beam energy of around 104 GeV was limited by
the fact that each particle radiated about 2 GeV per turn. By contrast,
the large rest mass of the proton means that synchrotron energy loss is
not a significant limiting factor for proton–antiproton colliders. For
example, the world’s highest energy collider at present is the Tevatron
proton–antiproton collider, at Fermilab (Batavia, Illinois), which, with
a circumference of only 6 km, achieves a beam energy of 1,000 GeV (or
1 TeV); the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), using two proton beams in
the 27-km LEP tunnel, will achieve beam energies of 7 TeV.
Although the beam energies of proton colliders may be much higher,
for experiments at these colliders there are a number of challenges that
stem from the fact that protons and antiprotons are strongly interacting,
composite particles. A high-energy proton–antiproton collision is shown
schematically in Fig. 1b. The highest energy collisions take place between
a valence quark from the proton and an antiquark from the antiproton.
These colliding partons carry fractions x1 and x2 of the momentum of
the incoming proton and antiproton, respectively. The energy, Q, in the
2
parton–parton centre-of-mass frame is given by Q2 = x1x2Ecm
. The prob-
ability of a proton containing a parton of type i at the appropriate values
of x1 and Q2 is given by a ‘parton distribution function’ (PDF), fi(x1, Q2).
The cross-section for the parton–parton collision to produce a given
105
Figure 3 | The cross-section for
e+e– annihilation to hadrons as a
function of Ecm. The solid line is the
prediction of the standard model,
and the points are the experimental
measurements. Also indicated are
the energy ranges of various e+e−
accelerators. (A cross-section of
1 pb = 10−40 m2.) Figure reproduced,
with permission, from ref. 12.
275INSIGHT REVIEW
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007
final state is denoted by σ̂(Q2). To determine the cross-section, σ, for the
proton–antiproton collision to produce this final state, we have to sum
over all possible combinations of incoming partons and integrate over
the momentum fractions x1 and x2:
‒
Therefore, the proton and antiproton beams, at a fixed beam energy,
can be thought of as broadband beams of partons.
The total cross-section for proton–antiproton collisions at high
energy is huge, and the event rate is consequently large — at the Teva-
tron, for example, about 10 collisions take place each time the bunches
of protons and antiprotons meet and cross each other in the circular
machine. Such bunch crossings take place 1.7 million times each sec-
ond. But most of these collisions are rather uninteresting, because they
result from a low momentum transfer between the proton and antipro-
ton. Interesting processes, such as those containing W or Z bosons, are
produced at a much lower rate and can be difficult to observe above
the huge background.
Furthermore, the PDFs cannot be calculated from first principles in
QCD. They can, however, be fixed by experimental measurements. A
great deal of information on PDFs has come from the H1 and ZEUS
experiments at the HERA collider, at DESY (Hamburg). At HERA, 27.5-
GeV beams of electrons or positrons collide with a 920-GeV beam of
protons, to produce 320 GeV in the centre-of-mass frame. The electrons
and positrons provide a clean (electroweak-interaction) probe of the
276
proton structure, and hence the PDFs, at these energies; the measured
PDFs can then be extrapolated, using, for example, the so-called DGLAP
evolution equations of QCD, to the much higher energies that are rel-
evant at the Tevatron and the LHC.
A further complication is that the initial-state partons have a high
probability of radiating gluons before they collide. To some extent, this
can be compensated by tuning Monte Carlo simulations of the collisions
to those events that include leptonically decaying W and Z bosons (in
which there is no complication from the possibility of final-state gluon
bremsstrahlung). Nevertheless, the uncertainties associated with the lack
of precise predictions for initial-state gluon bremsstrahlung represent a
significant source of sytematic uncertainty in many analyses.
Proton and electron colliders are thus complementary: proton collid-
ers offer the energy reach to make discoveries; electron colliders provide
a cleaner experimental environment in which it is easier to make precise
measurements.
Experiments at high-energy particle colliders typically share many
common features, which are motivated by the requirements of the
various measurements to be made. The basic aims are to detect with
high efficiency each particle produced in the high-energy collision,
to measure as accurately as possible its energy and momentum and to
determine its particle type. No single detector type can achieve all of
the above for all types of particle. Therefore, an experiment comprises
a number of different detector systems, each of which has a specialized
function. For example, at the centre of most experiments are detectors
that measure the tracks produced by charged particles. Calorimeters are
used for energy measurement, and muon systems are used for specific
identification of those particles. An important feature of such detec-
tors is their hermetic nature, which allows any apparent imbalance in
the net transverse momentum of the visible particles to be ascribed to
the production of weakly interacting particles, such as neutrinos. Fig. 2
shows, as an example, a cut-away view of the OPAL experiment at LEP,
which is typical of detector design.
Discoveries and mounting evidence
By the late 1970s, the majority of the elementary fermions had been
discovered. In particular, the discovery in the mid-1970s of the bot-
tom quark and the tau lepton firmly established the existence of a third
generation of fermions. However, there was only indirect evidence for
the existence of two members of that generation: the top quark and the
tau neutrino.
By contrast, among the elementary bosons only the photon had been
observed directly as a physical particle. Although there was strong indi-
rect evidence for the existence of the gluon, the first direct evidence
came from the observations in 1979 by the JADE, Mark-J, TASSO and
PLUTO experiments at the 30–35-GeV e+e− collider PETRA, at DESY.
These experiments found events containing three hadronic jets, which
correspond to the quark and antiquark produced in the e+e− collision,
plus a gluon radiated from one of the quarks. The W and Z bosons
were observed directly for the first time in 1983, by the UA1 and UA2
experiments1–4 at the 560–640-GeV Super Proton Synchroton (SPS) pro-
ton–antiproton collider at CERN — a collider project that was conceived
for the specific purpose of finding these particles and was rewarded with
the 1984 Nobel Prize in Physics. The masses of the W and Z measured
by the UA1 and UA2 experiments were found to be consistent with
expectations, which was a beautiful confirmation of the standard model
in electroweak interactions.
The scene was then set in 1989 for the 90-GeV e+e− colliders, LEP1
at CERN and SLC at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC;
California). The ALEPH, DELPHI, L3 and OPAL experiments at LEP1
and the SLD experiment at the SLC performed measurements of Z pro-
duction and decay that still today form the cornerstone of the precise
tests of the electroweak standard model. Measurements of the Z mass
elevated it to one of the most precisely known quantities within the
standard model. Measurements of the total decay width of the Z (to all
possible particle types) and the partial decay widths into each visible
final state (that is, all final states except for Z → νν‒) allowed the numberINSIGHT REVIEW
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007
of light neutrino species to be fixed at three. This observation effectively
confirmed the existence of the tau neutrino as a distinct physical particle
within the three-generation standard model and ruled out the existence
of a fourth generation of fermions, unless the neutrino from that gen-
eration has a mass greater than half that of the Z. (Direct observation
of the tau neutrino was finally reported5 in 2001, in a different style of
experiment using a proton beam directed at a fixed, tungsten target to
produce neutrinos.)
Experimenters at all of the high-energy colliders since the days of
PETRA had searched unsuccessfully for direct evidence for the existence
of the top quark. These searches continued at ‘Run I’ of the 1.8 TeV
Tevatron, which began in 1988. By 1994, the lower limit on the top quark
mass from direct searches had reached6,7 about 130 GeV. By that time,
there was also considerable indirect evidence for the existence of the
top quark. For example, measurements of the electroweak couplings
of the bottom quark were consistent with the hypothesis that it formed
one half of a pair of third-generation quarks within the standard model.
Furthermore, fits to the precise electroweak data from LEP1 and SLC
gave self-consistent results within the standard model only if the effects
of a top quark with a mass of between about 155 and 195 GeV were
included.
The top quark was directly observed for the first time in 1995, by the
CDF and DØ collaborations8,9 at the Tevatron. The first measurements
gave its mass as 180 ± 15 GeV, consistent with the indirect determina-
tions described above. This consistency represented a powerful con-
firmation of the electroweak standard model as an accurate picture of
elementary particle physics.
In the second phase of the LEP programme, running between 1996
and 2000 with a vastly upgraded system of radio-frequency (RF) accel-
erating cavities, a maximum Ecm of nearly 209 GeV was reached. This
allowed the production of W +W − pairs, enabling the ALEPH, DELPHI,
L3 and OPAL experiments at LEP2 to measure the mass, mW, and many
other properties of the W boson.
In 2002, the second phase of running, Run II, began at the Tevatron.
The accelerator complex was upgraded to deliver a slightly higher Ecm
of 1.96 TeV and, more importantly, a greatly increased luminosity; the
CDF and DØ detectors were also upgraded.
Now the most urgent question in particle physics (maybe in physics as
a whole) is: where is the Higgs? Just as with the top quark, this question
is being attacked on two fronts. Adding information from the direct
measurements of the mass of the W boson and the top quark (from LEP2
and the Tevatron) to the precise electroweak measurements (from LEP1
and SLC) improves the precision with which the standard model can
be tested. The overall fit gives self-consistent results only if the effects
of a moderately light Higgs boson are included. Currently, a value for
the Higgs mass of about 80 GeV is preferred, with an upper limit10, at
a 95% confidence level, of 144 GeV; further improvements to the mass
measurements from the Tevatron may narrow the confidence interval.
Direct searches for the Higgs boson were performed at LEP. The best
available direct lower limit11 on the Higgs mass is currently 114 GeV
(95% confidence level) from the search for e+e− → ZH at LEP2. This
already excludes a large part of the confidence interval allowed by the
standard-model fit. Direct searches for Higgs production are currently
the subject of intense effort at the Tevatron, and sensitivity to masses
beyond the LEP2 limit is expected in the near future.
Precise tests of the standard model
A central part of the particle physics programme over the past quarter of
a century has been to test the consistency of the standard model through
precise measurement of many of its parameters. Precise theoretical
calculations, implemented through computer codes of high technical
precision, and a careful assessment of residual theoretical uncertainties
are also essential elements in efforts to confront the standard model
using precise data.
Let us return to the simple process shown in Fig. 1a, the annihilation
of an e+e− pair to produce a fermion–antifermion pair through an elec-
troweak interaction mediated by the photon or Z boson. Particles that
appear as internal lines in a Feynman diagram, such as the photon or Z
in Fig. 1a, are ‘virtual’ particles — that is, they are not constrained to their
‘physical’ mass. However, the more virtual the particle becomes — the
further away it is from its physical mass — the smaller the resultant ampli-
tude for the process. Fig. 3 shows the cross-section for e+e− annihilation
as a function of centre-of-mass energy, Ecm, based on data from several
colliders including LEP and SLC. At low values of Ecm, the cross-section is
dominated by the photon-exchange diagram (an exchanged Z would be
highly virtual and the corresponding amplitude highly suppressed). With
increasing Ecm, the cross-section falls as the exchanged photon becomes
more and more virtual. At around 60 GeV, the amplitudes for photon
and Z exchange are of comparable magnitude. As Ecm approaches the
mass of the Z (91 GeV), the cross-section is dominated by the Z exchange
diagram and reaches a peak, called the ‘Z pole’.
The very large number of Z decays (around 20 million) collected
by the experiments at LEP1 has allowed precise measurements of the
couplings of the fermions to be made. The SLC delivered a much smaller
number of Z decays (around 600,000) to the SLD experiment. However,
the SLC delivered a longitudinally polarized e− beam, which collided
with an unpolarized e+ beam, whereas at LEP both beams were unpo-
larized. The dependence on handedness of the fermion couplings has
enabled SLD to make measurements, using polarized beams, that were
in some respects competitive with and complementary to the measure-
ments made at LEP1. (The results quoted in this section are all taken
from ref. 12 unless explicitly stated otherwise.)
A number of important electroweak quantities have been determined
from measurements around the Z pole at LEP1. The mass of the Z, mZ,
is related to the position of the peak in the cross-section, and total decay
width of the Z, ΓZ, is related to the width of the peak. The accuracy with
which mZ = (91.1875 ± 0.0021) GeV has been measured is limited by the
accuracy with which the mean energy of the colliding beams is known
over the entire data-taking period. Achieving such precision was a con-
siderable challenge and resulted from a successful collaboration between
physicists from both the LEP experiments and the accelerator. The energy
277INSIGHT REVIEW
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007
of a single circulating beam was determined to a high accuracy during
dedicated calibrations, using the technique of resonant depolarization.
However, such calibrations could be performed only every few days and
gave the beam energy only at that specific point in time. The challenge
was to propagate this precise knowledge of the beam energy over several
days of accelerator running.
The circumference of the beam orbit is fixed by the frequency with
which the RF accelerating cavities are excited. This frequency is very sta-
ble. The energy of the beams is then determined by the integral around
the accelerator ring of the vertical component of the magnetic field expe-
rienced by the beams. This vertical magnetic field is produced mainly
by the main ‘bending’ dipole magnets, but there is also a contribution
from the large number of quadrupole magnets in the machine if the
beam is not perfectly centred as it passes through them. If the position
of the beam with respect to the quadrupoles changes over a period of
hours or days this can affect the beam energy by a significant amount.
Lunar tides, high rainfall in the nearby Jura mountains and changes in
the water level of Lake Geneva all caused sufficient physical distortion
of the accelerator (changing its radius by a few parts in 10−9) to produce
a measureable effect on the beam energy.
Erratic electric currents flowing in the accelerator beam pipe also
affected the dipole fields over periods of many hours during which
beams were circulating in the accelerator. Measurements of the spatial
distribution of these currents around the ring established that they were
produced by leakage currents from trains running on the Geneva-to-
Bellegarde line. Understanding these various effects meant that a model
could be developed to predict the beam energy as a function of time
during data collection. Ultimately, residual uncertainties in the beam-
energy calibration introduced systematic uncertainties of 0.0017 GeV in
mZ and 0.0012 GeV in ΓZ, correlated among the four experiments.
The total decay width, ΓZ = (2.4952 ± 0.0023) GeV, is given by the sum
of the partial decay widths for each possible type of final-state fermion–
antifermion pair. By measuring ΓZ and the partial decay widths for each
a
q
visible final state (quarks and charged leptons), the partial decay width
to invisible final states (which in the standard model are neutrino–anti-
neutrino pairs) can be determined. This number may be interpreted as
a measurement of the number of types of light neutrino produced in
Z decay, Nν = 2.9840 ± 0.0082. This result requires the measurement of
absolute cross-sections. These require a precise determination of the
‘luminosity’ of the accelerator, which is achieved by measuring the rate
of low-angle electron–positron scattering. That the necessary precision
of order 10−4 was achieved in these measurements represents a great suc-
cess for theorists and experimentalists engaged in this joint project.
The rate of Z decays to quark–antiquark final states is enhanced by a
factor related to αs, the strong coupling constant, (1 + αs2/π +…). Thus,
a precise measurement of αs can be made: αs = 0.118 ± 0.03. This is in
agreement with other precise determinations13, such as those from event
shapes (which are sensitive to the amount of final-state gluon radiation),
and represents an important consistency test of QCD.
Asymmetries
Another class of electroweak measurement made at LEP1 and the SLC
is of various asymmetries that are sensitive to the difference between
the left- and right-handed couplings. One of the most sensitive of these
electroweak measurements, and also one of the easiest to understand, is
the so-called left–right asymmetry, ALR. This is measured with polarized
e− beams at the SLC and is defined as:
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007
(σF − σB)L − (σF − σB)R
ALRFB ≡ _________________
(σF + σB)L + (σF + σB)R
me as
L RFB
LEP1 and SLD
LEP2 and the Tevatron
80.5
mW (GeV)
The advantage of defining ALR as above is that many factors — such as
the dependence on the final-state couplings, acceptance of the detector,
and so on — cancel in the ratio (as long as the experimental acceptance
and <Pe> are independent of the sign of the beam polarization). For
such measurements at the Z pole, corrections (which are usually small)
must be made to account for the photon-exchange diagram (Fig. 1a) and
for the interference between the photon- and Z-exchange diagrams. In
addition, a correction has to be applied for the fact that bremsstrahlung
from the incoming e+e− results in an average annihilation centre-of-mass
energy that is lower than the nominal Ecm of the colliding beams. Results
are corrected to correspond to Ecm = mZ, and these ‘pole’ cross-sections
and asymmetries are therefore to be interpreted as corresponding to pure
Z exchange at exactly Ecm = mZ; they are sometimes denoted by adding the
0
superscript ‘0’ to the corresponding variable name, for example, ALR
.
−
As we have seen above, the fact that left- and right-handed e have
different couplings from the Z produces an asymmetry between the
annihilation cross-section for left- and right-hand-polarized incoming
e− beams. In addition, the difference between the left- and right-handed
fermion couplings produces asymmetries in the angular distributions
of the outgoing fermions. Consider an incoming e− beam that is 100%
left-hand polarized: angular-momentum conservation requires that this
can annihilate only with the right-handed component of the incoming e+
beam to produce Zs that are 100% polarized in the direction opposite to
the incoming e− beam. Angular-momentum conservation in the decay of
the Z has the consequence that the preferred direction for the outgoing
fermions to emerge is along the direction of the incoming e− beam (the
‘forward’ direction) for left-handed fermions and in the opposite direc-
tion (the ‘backward’ direction) for right-handed fermions.
Using polarized electrons, as at the SLC, it is possible to define the
‘left–right forward–backward’ asymmetry,
80.4
80.3
mH (GeV)
114
150
300
1,000
175
mt (GeV)
200
Figure 7 | Contours at 68% confidence level showing the direct (LEP2
and the Tevatron) and indirect (LEP1 and SLC) measurements of mW and
mt. The shaded band shows the predictions of the standard model for
various values of mH. Figure reproduced, with permission, from ref. 10.
momenta of the observed tau decay products are correlated with the
handedness of the produced tau.
All of the asymmetry measurements discussed are sensitive to the dif-
ference between the left- and right-handed fermion couplings and thus to
the value of sin2θW. The degree to which the different classes of asymmetry
measurements yield consistent values of sin2θW — as illustrated in Fig. 4
—represents an important consistency check of the standard model.
Consistency of the standard model
me as
L RFB
As before, the measured asymmetry, A , is given by A
= <Pe> ALRFB.
At LEP, the e− and e+ beams were unpolarized. That is, there were equal
numbers of left- and right-handed incoming beam particles. Neverthe-
less, the fact that left- and right-handed e− have different couplings to
the Z produces an asymmetry between the numbers of left- and right-
hand incoming e− that annihilate. Thus, the produced Zs are partially
polarized along the direction of the incoming beams, and the differ-
ence between the left- and right-handed fermion couplings produces a
forward–backward asymmetry, AFB, in the angular distributions of the
outgoing fermions, which is given by:
(σF − σB)
AFB ≡ _______
(σF + σB)
The forward–backward asymmetry with unpolarized beams, AFB, mixes
the couplings of the initial- and final-state particles. This makes AFB
intrinsically a less sensitive measure of the electroweak mixing angle,
θW, (in the form sin2θW) than measurements possible with polarized
beams. However, the much larger samples of Zs available at the LEP
experiments compensate for this lack of intrinsic sensitivity.
To measure ALRFB and AFB, it is necessary to isolate a sample of Z decays
to a particular fermion type and to distinguish the fermion from the
antifermion. In the case of Z decays to charged leptons this is fairly
straightforward: events containing a high-momentum e−e+, μ−μ+ or
τ−τ+ pair may be readily distinguished from one another and from other
backgrounds; the electric charge distinguishes the lepton from the anti-
lepton. In the case of Z decays to quarks, precise measurements of AFB
are only really possible in the cc‒ and bb‒ final states.
In most cases it is not possible to determine the handedness of the
final-state particles (hence observables are usually summed over this
quantity). The one exception is for final-state tau leptons, where the
In W+W− events at LEP2, the value of mW is obtained by directly recon-
structing the invariant mass of the pair of particles produced in the
W decay. In principle, the two final states with high branching ratios
— qq‒lν‒ and qq‒qq‒ — give similar statistical sensitivity. However, in the
qq‒qq‒ channel, uncertainties associated with strong interactions and
Bose–Einstein correlations between the products of the two hadroni-
cally decaying Ws render the measurement of mW in this channel less
precise. The combination of results14 from the four LEP experiments
yields mW = (80.376 ± 0.033) GeV. Other properties of the W (such as the
branching ratios shown in Fig. 5) were measured14 at LEP2.
At the Tevatron, only the leptonic decays W → eν and W → μν can
be used to measure mW. CDF has produced the first preliminary meas-
urement of mW using the Run II data accumulated so far, and it has
an uncertainty to match that of a single LEP experiment. Including
data from Run I, the Tevatron average10 is mW = (80.429 ± 0.039) GeV.
Combining the LEP and Tevatron values gives the ‘world average’10 as
mW = (80.398 ± 0.025) GeV.
The most important process for producing top quarks in pp‒ collisions
is shown in Fig. 6a. The dominant decay of the top quark is t → Wb and
possible signatures of tt‒ production are shown schematically in Fig. 6c.
If one W decays leptonically and one W decays hadronically, a final state
is produced containing a high-transverse-momentum lepton, missing
transverse momentum (due to the undetected neutrino) and four high-
transverse-momentum jets. This occurs in about 46% of tt‒ pairs pro-
duced, and this so-called ‘lepton + jets’ channel yields the most precise
measurement of mt. The combination15 of CDF and DØ measurements
gives mt = (170.9 ± 1.8) GeV. This precision of around 1% makes mt by far
the most precisely known quark mass. The ultimate precision expected
for the Tevatron measurements is around 20 MeV for mW and around
1 GeV on mt; to equal such precision at the LHC will take much time
and concerted effort.
It is interesting to understand how experiments can produce evidence
for the existence of a particle, and even constrain its mass and couplings,
279INSIGHT REVIEW
NATURE|Vol 448|19 July 2007
even though they have insufficient energy to produce the particle directly.
The indirect effects of the top quark and the Higgs boson may be observed
at LEP/SLC because of the existence of processes such as those shown in
Fig. 6b. The possibility of such ‘radiative corrections’ modifies the simple
‘lowest-order’ picture of e+e− annihilation in Fig. 1a, and experimentally
observable effects become sensitive to the masses and couplings of virtual
eff
particles in such loops. For example, it is usual to consider sin2θW
, an
‘effective’ parameter that absorbs the effect of the radiative corrections
but allows the basic form of the coupling equations involving sin2θW to
stay the same. The correction to sin2θW can be calculated in the stan-
dard model; it depends on the square of the top quark mass, mt, but only
logarithmically on the Higgs mass, mH. An illustration of these effects is
given in the lower half of Fig. 4, in which the experimentally measured
value of sin2θWeff is compared with the prediction of the standard model
as a function of mH.
The contours in Fig. 7 show the world-average direct measurements
of mW and mt compared with the indirect values of those quantities
extracted from the standard-model fit to the LEP and SLC data. The
shaded band shows the predictions of the standard model for various
values of mH. The fact that the direct and indirect values of mW and mt
agree is a triumph of the standard model.
An even more stringent test of the consistency of the standard-model
fit to all available high-energy electroweak data is shown in Fig. 8: each
measured quantity is compared with its value obtained from the fit. The
largest single deviation is seen for A0,b
FB (the forward–backward asym-
metry for Z decays to bottom quarks) measured at LEP1, but, particu-
larly given the number of measurements considered, a discrepancy of 2.8
standard deviations in one of them does not meet the threshold required
for claiming a significant departure from the standard model.
The increased samples of tt‒ events available at Run II have allowed
measurements of the cross-section for tt‒ production and of t quark prop-
erties, such as spin, electric charge and decay branching ratios, that are
|Omeas − Ofit|/σmeas
consistent with those expected in the standard model16. The Tevatron
experiments are also detecting processes with ever smaller cross-sec-
tions— which bodes well for developing the sensitivity of the searches
for the Higgs boson at this collider. The CDF experiment has detected the
associated production of WZ pairs17 and has found the first evidence at a
hadron collider for the production of ZZ pairs18; the DØ experiment has
found the first evidence for electroweak production of single top quarks19,
enabling the first direct determination of the t → Wb coupling.
The years ahead
The next few years will be an exciting time in experimental particle
physics, with first collisions at the 14 TeV proton–proton collider, the
LHC, scheduled for 2008. Until then, as the world’s current highest-
energy collider, the Tevatron has a monopoly on direct searches for new
physics at a high-mass scale and can perform the most stringent tests
of the point-like nature of the fundamental particles.
The Tevatron will run at least until late 2009; its mantle will not pass
to the LHC overnight. Except for a few special cases that could produce
the most spectacular, unmistakable signatures, it will take time to under-
stand and calibrate the LHC accelerator and detectors.
It is hard to imagine that new physics beyond the standard model
will not be found at the LHC. What form that new physics will take is
harder to imagine. We know from the past 30 years’ work that all theories
predicting any observable effects beyond the predictions of the standard
model were quickly disposed of by experiment. This means that no mat-
ter what is to come, the standard model will remain at least an extremely
accurate ‘approximation’ to the physics of elementary particles at scales
up to a few hundred GeV.
